--page i

ARCHITECTURE AND PRICES
IN ENGLAND


--page ii

London
Henry Frowde
Oxford University Press Warehouse
7 Paternoster Row


--page iii

A HISTORY 
OF 
AGRICULTURE AND PRICES 
IN ENGLAND 


FROM THE YEAR AFTER THE OXFORD PARLIAMENT (1359) 
TO THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE CONTINENTAL WAR (1793) 


COMPILED ENTIRELY FROM ORIGINAL AND 
CONTEMPORANEOUS RECORDS 


BY 
JAMES E. THOROLD ROGERS, M. A. 
Professor of Political Economy in the University of Oxford; 
Tooke Professor of Economic Science and Statistics, King's College, London. 


VOL. I. 
1259—1400 


Oxford
at the Clarendon Press 
M.DCCC.LXVI. 

[All Rights reserved.] 


--page iv


--page v

PREFACE. 

XHEEE is no need of any apology in offering the 
facts contained in these volumes to such persons as 
are interested in the social history of the southern 
part of our island. They are an attempt to satisfy 
a total void — the complete absence of all satisfactory 
information on prices in medieval England. As no 
treatment of the subject has been in any sense hereto- 
fore attempted, it was necessary to publish the great 
mass of facts which have been gathered, as well as to 
offer comments on their significance. 

There is no European country, I believe, except Eng- 
land, the archives of which could supply satisfactory 
evidence of prices. Up to the time of Henry the Eighth 
the changes in the English currency, even if they were 
really operative on prices, were effected at well-known 
dates. I have attempted in the course of this volume 
to give reasons for the opinion which I entertain, that 
up to the reformation of the currency by Elizabeth, 
payments were made by weight. But in every other 
European community, the administration has tampered 


--page vi PREFACE.

with the currency so frequently, that all money prices 
are open to suspicion. If they can be collected in 
sufficient quantity, medieval prices in England repre- 
sent current values. Again, there are probably few 
such archives in England, of a date previous to the 
Reformation, as are found in the muniment-rooms of 
Colleges and Cathedrals, and in the Public Record 
Office, for our aristocracy and gentry date, on the 
whole, from the days of Henry the Eighth. 

I anticipate that the facts and comments contained 
in these volumes will attract but few readers. The 
form of such a work is necessarily repulsive, and the 
dry details of business transacted many centuries ago 
will have but little charm for the general public. But 
there is nevertheless contained in these relics no small 
portion of the bygone life of the English people, perhaps 
even some materials which may aid in constructing a 
philosophy of history, by giving depth and solidity to 
the political events which have been narrated by our 
annalists. 

Such labours as those which I have undertaken are 
essential to that economical interpretation of history 
which, I venture on asserting, is as important an aid 
towards the comprehension of the past as the study 
of legal antiquities, of diplomatic intrigues, or of 
military campaigns. There are very few important 
events on which an estimate of those facts, which 
form the special study of the economist, would not 
throw great light. But as a rule, the pains neces- 
sary for a sufficient acquaintance with these circum- 


--page vii PREFACE.

stances have never been bestowed at all, or at least 
bestowed impatiently and grudgingly. Yet if there 
be, as some writers have perhaps over-hastily asserted, 
a science of history, that is a method of analysing facts 
by which the future of a nation may be predicted, as 
well as the past interpreted, this wiU surely be found 
most fully in that portion of its annals which is eco- 
nomical. The English nation has not been moulded 
into its present shape by its constitution and its laws, 
since its history is by no means an uninterrupted ad- 
vancement; for both laws and constitution have been 
the products of a variety of transient energies, most 
of them, in so far as they are expressions of the 
national temper, being derived from economical con- 
siderations, or in great part modified by them. I 
cannot, for example, trace the boldness of Henry the 
Fourth's parliaments to that monarch's usurpation or 
unpopularity, but to the vigorous growth of a wealthy 
and hardy peasantry. I do not detect the power of 
Henry the Eighth's government in the strength of that 
monarch's understanding, for to any but the shallowest 
observation he was the most shortsighted and selfish 
monarch who ever sat on the English throne, but to 
the fact that society was dislocated for a time by the 
economical consequences of the great war of succession. 
The fact that for centuries the battle of constitutional 
liberty was fought in the counties, was due to the 
action of those freeholders who had achieved their 
independence by economical causes ; while contrarily 
another set of economical causes has accomplished the 


--page viii PREFACE.

decline, and is accomplishing the gradual extinction, of 
this independent order. Or to take an example from 
the history of the popes. It is clear, I think, that the 
migration to Avignon ; though its consequences were 
the degradation of the papal power, and the substitu- 
tion, on the return of the pontiffs, of a mere succession 
of adventurers in the papal chair ; of men whose sole 
business became the aggrandisement of their families, 
instead of the leadership of Italian opinion and the 
policy of Italian unity ; was originally dictated by the 
reasonable desire of making the curia more accessible 
to the Western nations. 

But the study of the past history of the English 
people, as distinguished from the annals of its govern- 
ment, has a deeper and more permanent significance 
than the gratification of that refined curiosity which 
avoids the present by lingering in the past. As we 
live, if we entertain a real love for our own race, and 
a keen sense of our duty towards the nation of our 
own age, we are more and more constrained to examine 
the character of its social life, and especially of its eco- 
nomical features. But it is to no real purpose to learn 
the lesson by which wealth is produced, unless we are 
also ready to leave to their natural freedom those 
agencies by which wealth is distributed. It is vain 
to rejoice over the aggregate of our prosperity, and to 
forget that great part of the nation has no share in 
its benefits. It may be that the wisdom of our 
forefathers was accidental ; it is certain that society 
was divided by less sharp lines, and was held to- 


--page ix PREFACE.

gether by common ties in a far closer manner, in the 
times which it has been my fortune to study, than 
it is now. The feudal system of the Middle Ages 
was one of mutual interests, its theory of property 
involved far more exacting duties than modem rights 
ever acknowledge, or remember, or perhaps know. 

Nor is the bearing of such facts as will be found 
recorded in these two volumes without its meaning on 
those maxims of political economy, the adoption of 
which is already general, and the practice of which 
is destined at no remote period to become the chief 
function of wise government. All economists profess 
that the illustration of facts is quite as important in 
the method of their science as the discussion or eluci- 
dation of principles. In my opinion it is even more 
important, because these facts form the basis for 
economical inductions. Very few authors, however, 
have combined exact reasoning with plentiful illus- 
tration ; very few, however much they have professed 
to defer to experience, have undergone the drudgery 
of patient observation. Adam Smith and Tooke are 
eminent exceptions. 

If, during the course of history, mankind has re- 
mained the same, at least as regards those impulses 
and sentiments which economists accept, that inter- 
pretation of facts will be the most safe which is 
confined to the simplest examples of unobstructed 
exchange. In the Middle Ages, on the whole, govern- 
ments had not developed to any marked extent that 
protective system, that perpetual interference with 


--page x PREFACE. 

the freedom of trade, which has characterized their 
later activity. I do not mean that there was no de- 
sire to adopt restrictions, that there were no attempts 
to fix prices, both at home and at the porte. But the 
machinery was not provided by which such limitations 
could be operative. Some of the problems of political 
economy therefore, I venture on stating, can be dis- 
cerned and determined with greater ease from the 
facts which I am able to bring before my reader, 
fragmentary as they sometimes are, than they could 
be out of the wider information of our own time. 
Thus, for instance, the laws which govern prices will, 
I think, be seen more clearly in these medieval records 
than they could be in a modem Price Current. 

Lastly, as there were no regular means for supplying 
deficiencies in the produce of the home market by 
foreign importations ; the prices of necessaries, such 
as corn, give no small insight into the course of the 
seasons, and supply the best means for discovering a 
cycle of seasons, if, as I do not dare to assert, such a 
cycle can yet be found. Similarly, as salt was always, 
it seems, manufactured by evaporation, the price of 
this article, some obvious deductions being made, may 
suggest the aggregate of solar heat and light in the 
several years of the enquiry. I shall attempt in a 
short time to publish one or two diagrams which will 
illustrate this hypothesis, by exhibiting the rise and 
fall in the price of certain articles. 

The age of dedications has passed away ; and even 
where the form lingers it merely intends a compliment. 


--page xi PREFACE.

or an expression of friendship. During the time in 
which all my labours were given to the collection of 
materials for this work, none among my friends cheered 
me with more affectionate interest than Cobden did, 
the man whose loss the whole civilized world mourned, 
whose life the whole civilized world will hereafter 
study with increasing admiration, and increasing profit. 
Had he been longer spared to the nation on whom he 
had heaped such great benefits, I should have been 
able to associate his name with my book, as I should 
have assuredly consulted his experience for my in- 
ferences. 

If this work be received with favour, I purpose in 
the next two volumes to continue the enquiry down 
to the year 1582, from which date wheat and malt 
averages have been recorded regularly every six months. 
As the historical interest of the period contained in the 
present volumes centres in the effects of the Famine 
of 1315-16 and of the Plague of 1348, so that of the 
next period culminates in the currency schemes of 
1543-1551.

It remains that I should tender my thanks to the 
Delegates of the University Press, who have taken the 
responsibility of these volumes on their hands. After 
the Restoration, and again since the days in which the 
University of Oxford received from the heir of its 
eminent author, the great gift of Clarendon's History, 
it has continually supported the publication of works 
which illustrate the annals of this country, and has 
done infinite service to Historical research. I can only 


--page xii PREFACE. 

hope that this publication may not discredit the judg- 
ment of the Delegates. 

* * * I must remind the reader that any given year, 
as 1300, means, as a rule, from Michaelmas 1300 to 
Michaelmas 1301, and that the exceptions are only 
from July to July. It would have been impossible to 
adopt any other calculation. 

Oxford, Apr. 25, 1866. 


--page xiii

CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER I. 
Introductory 1 

CHAPTER II. 
Medieval Agriculture 11 

CHAPTER III. 
Rate of Production in the Thirteenth and Fourteenth 
Centuries 50 

CHAPTER IV. 
Social Distinctions, and the General Distribution of 
Wealth 63 

CHAPTER V. 
Social and Domestic Economy 113 

CHAPTER VI. 
Medieval Justice and Courts 126 


--page xiv CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER VII. 
Journeys and Markets 134 

CHAPTER VIII. 
Foreign Trade and Commercial Routes .... 145 

CHAPTER IX. 
Taxes and Contributions 154 

CHAPTER X. 
Weights and Measures 164 

CHAPTER XL 
Currency 173 

CHAPTER XII. 
Averages of Prices 181 

CHAPTER XIII. 
On the Price of Grain 186 

CHAPTER XIV. 
Fodder and Hay 248 

CHAPTER XV. 
On the Price of Labour 252

CHAPTER XVI. 
The Price of Live Stock 326 


--page xv CONTENTS.

CHAPTER XVII. 
The Price of Wool 364 

CHAPTER XVIII. 
On the Prices of Farm Produce 396 

CHAPTER XIX. 
On the Price of Materials employed in Agricultural 
Economy 455 

CHAPTER XX. 
On the Price of Building Materials 485 

CHAPTER XXI. 
Agricultural Implements, Tools, and Furniture 522

CHAPTER XXII. 
On the Price of Textile Fabrics and Clothing 568 

CHAPTER XXIII. 
On the Price of Metals 594 

CHAPTER XXIV. 
On the Price of Fish 606 

CHAPTER XXV. 
On the Price of Foreign Produce 618 

CHAPTER XXVI. 
Sundry Articles 642 


--page xvi CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER XXVII. 
On the Cost of Carriage 650 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 
On the Profits of Agriculture before and after the 
Plague 667 

CHAPTER XXIX. 
On the Purchasing Power of Wages 682


--page 1

CHAPTER I. 

INTRODUCTORY. 

It is my purpose, in the work before me, to attempt a 
History of Agriculture in England, and to supply a record of 
prices, especially of corn and labour, from the time at which 
the earliest consecutive annals begin, down to the close of 
the eighteenth century. These two volumes will embrace the 
period of one hundred and forty-two years ; from the summer, 
that is to say, next after that of the great parliament at 
Oxford, held under the auspices of Simon de Montfort, to the 
second year of Henry the Fourth. The date at which the 
enquiry commences is accidental, being due to the circum- 
stance that I have found continuous information only from 
the year 1259. In all cases the record is contemporaneous 
with the transactions which it narrates, and, with but one or 
two exceptions, the facts are hitherto unpublished. It is, in- 
deed, somewhat remarkable, though antiquarian research has 
been busy for at least the last two centuries; and apart from 
the aid which enquiries into the economical history of medi- 
eval England would throw upon its real history, though the 
contrast of prices at different epochs has been a subject of 
considerable interest ; that the records from which I have had 
the fortune to procure the evidence, which is now laid before 
the reader, should have been undisturbed, perhaps undetected. 
It is not too much to say, that all attempts hitherto made to 


--page 2 INTRODUCTORY. 

give information as to the record of prices in England are 
exceedingly imperfect, interrupted, and, judged by the com- 
monest rules of evidence, untrustworthy. The account in 
Bishop Fleetwood is very meagre, and many statements are 
repeated from doubtful authorities. Nor has much addition 
been made to Fleetwood's evidence since the date of his work, 
in the works of Macpherson and Eden. 

The student of medieval records is continually struck by 
the uniformity with which changes in the habits and customs 
of the community are effected. Experience enables an expert 
to determine with tolerable precision the date of a manuscript 
record, whether the document is an account of transactions 
in Northumberland or Hants, in Cornwall or Kent. The 
delicate and rather cramped handwriting of the conclusion of 
Henry the Third's reign gives way to the vigorous and elegant 
character of Edward the First's time, this again to the bold 
coarse letters of Edward the Second; while the style of the 
early part of Edward the Third, similar in some respects to 
that which prevailed thirty years before, gradually degene- 
rates into the clumsy scrawl which belongs to the reign of 
Richard the Second; and this last gives way to the neat and 
angular letters which are found in English manuscripts of the 
end of the fourteenth and commencement of the fifteenth 
centuries. In all cases the change is sudden and almost simul- 
taneous. We shall see how similar changes take place in the 
economy of agriculture. 

Except the Pipe rolls, very few documents, other than 
charters and records of legal procedure, exist before the last 
twenty years of the reign of Henry the Third. It would 
seem that landowners began about that time to keep regular 
accounts. It cannot be by accident that so few accounts 
of the estates held by the Bigods are anterior to the last 
years of the monarch just mentioned. If these records ex- 
tended far back into the long reign of Henry the Third we 
should be able, no doubt, to trace the circumstances by which 
so great a change was effected in the material condition of 


--page 3 INTRODUCTORY.

the people as serve to contrast, I think, so markedly the 
times of the Second and the Third Henry. 

That during this long reign of Henry the Third the mass 
of the English people passed from the condition of serfs, per- 
haps even slaves, into that of freemen, subject in some cases 
to a small money-rent for their holdings, and in others to 
labour-rents, servile indeed in character, but fixed and inva- 
riable, will be plain to those who compare the Court rolls of 
the last half of the thirteenth century with the evidence which 
Madox has collected as to the state of the poorer classes in 
the days of John. The change, however, is insensible, and 
the progress so gradual as not to be traceable, except by com- 
paring states of society at different epochs. 

Whatever were the faults of the administration in the reign 
of Henry the Third, his reign, fifty-six years in duration, was 
far more pacific than that of any monarch from the Conquest 
to the close of the fifteenth century. He had no Scotch war ; 
the chronic hostility of the Welsh appears to have manifested 
itself in little more than plundering incursions ; and the cam- 
paigns in France were few and indecisive. The domestic ad- 
ministration appears also to have been vigorous, if we judge 
from results. The robber baron disappears with Fawkes de 
Breaute; the great justiciary Hubert de Burgh seems to have 
induced habits of order; and Henry, when he emerged from 
nonage, succeeded to an authority which had been exercised 
prudently by his guardian. His own easiness and incaution 
certainly led him, at the conclusion of his reign, into collision 
with his barons; but faulty as was his judgment in attempting 
to secure the crown of Naples for his son, and ruinous as the 
venture became, this seems to have been the single error of 
his foreign policy. He failed, and Charles of Anjou succeeded, 
perhaps as the heir of his expenditure. Had Edmund gained 
the crown of Naples, it is probable that the Sicilian Vespers 
would never have been enacted. 

In Henry's reign the baron is no longer the enemy, but the 
leader of the people. In earlier days, the feudal lord is ex- 


--page 4 INTRODUCTORY. 

coriator rusticorum, as were Robert de Belesme, and most of 
the old Norman baronage. The English of Henry's reign, 
who looked on Simon de Montfort as a champion in life, 
treated him as a saint after death. But Simon's administra- 
tion in Guienne was not that of a demagogue, nor was his 
leadership of the feudal opposition, with its customary policy, 
insurrection, the act of a man who had made terms with his 
inferiors, by abandoning and depressing his own order. We 
should search in vain for a baron like Simon in any reign 
before that of Henry the Third. They are found in plenty 
after his time, though none perhaps were so capable or so 
disinterested as this Cromwell of the thirteenth century. 
Matthew Paris is sufficiently querulous, but the reader will 
search in vain for the ferocious and insolent chieftain of the 
first fifty years of the house of Anjou, or for the cruelties which 
disfigure earlier times, in the pages of his history. 

The two great English universities existed certainly before 
the reign of Henry the Third, for we read of three thousand 
students at Oxford in the reign of John{^a}; of the masters of 
the schools in the days of Henry's grandfather{^b}; of a concourse 
of students thither in the reign of Stephen{^c}. But Oxford and 
Cambridge appear to have been consolidated in the middle 
of the thirteenth century. In 1252, Boniface, archbishop of 
Canterbury, visited the university{^d}, and laid his grievances 
before the scholars. He was received respectfully, and enter- 

{^a} Matt. Paris. 228. 21. 

{^b} Cronica Jocelini de Brakelond, p. 69. 

{^c} As far as I have been able to find, the only author who states that Vacarius 
lectured at Oxford in the year 1148 is Gerrase of Dover (Twysden, 1665). Robert 
de Monti (Hist. Nermann, p. 983) says that he lectured in England, but does not 
specify the locality. Mf. Hallam quotes John of Salisbury, as cited by Selden in his 
Dissertation on Fleta, to the effect that the lectures took place at Oxford. But 
Salisbury (who had been present at Becket's murder, and was wounded on that occa- 
sion) merely states that Vacarius was invited to England by Archbishop Theobald, and 
that, after lecturing, he was silenced at Stephen's instance. But, says Selden (p. 511, 
edit. 1647), we do not know whether he lectured at Oxford, Cambridge, London, 
or in the archbishop's palace. 

{^d} Matt. Paris. 859 I. 


--page 5 INTRODUCTORY.

tained sumptuously, and on leaving is said to have acknow- 
ledged that Oxford was a worthy rival of Paris. Cambridge 
too is not rarely alluded to by contemporary annalists. How- 
ever much persons may censure or ridicule the direction taken 
by human thought in the thirteenth century, it cannot be 
doubted that it was marked by considerable activity. Henry 
seems to have conferred considerable privileges on the uni- 
versities, and to have shewn them great favour. His reign 
saw the commencement of the collegiate system, in the en- 
dowments of Merton College and Peterhouse. 

The moral and material progress of society almost always 
escape the attention of the contemporaneous historian. But 
succeeding writers may detect their course in the tone taken 
by those who criticise the acts of the government under which 
they live. Mr. Hallam has noticed the diflFerence between 
the complaints of a writer like Hoveden, and of another like 
Matthew Paris. The wail over universal oppression, violence, 
and lawlessness, is changed for indignant comment on unwise 
administration, and uncourtly criticism on the king's domestic 
and foreign policy. This alone would be evidence of a radical 
change in the general condition of the people. I do not doubt 
that much of the condemnation passed by the monk of S. Al- 
ban's on Henry's public acts is just; but it is clear, I think, 
that Henry was a far better monarch than many who pre- 
ceded him and many who followed him. The country be- 
came prosperous during his reign, and the complaints made 
about the greediness of his foreign relatives, and the extortions 
of the pope, are indirect evidence of the material progress 
which marked Henry's government. He may not have been 
possessed in great measure of that ferocious courage which 
belonged to the house of Anjou, he certainly was not more 
insincere than his father, his uncle, and his grandfather; and 
his judgment was perhaps weak. But he succeeded to a mi- 
nority in which the hereditary resources of the crown had 
been narrowed by unsparing grants to the barons, and he was 
always in difficulties. The great error of his policy, his at- 


--page 6 INTRODUCTORY. 

tempt to secure the crown of Naples for his son Edmund, and 
the enormous indebtedness which he incurred, are the greatest 
errors in his public policy. But he was, in the language of 
the age, the feudal dependent of the pope, by an arrange- 
ment, extorted perhaps in the first instance from the fears of 
John, but ratified afterwards by the policy of Pembroke. The 
error of Henry's attempt seems to me, judging from the 
general way in which such matters are interpreted, to have 
consisted in its failure. 

It does not seem, therefore, that Henry was a monarch to 
whom Mr. Hallam's epithet 'worthless' is fairly applicable, if 
we judge his administration by its effects. His private cha- 
racter is untarnished, and he seems to have been easy, open, 
and kind. He was, it appears, passionate, but easily appeased, 
and his memory is not stained by cruelty. The heaviest 
charges on his management of domestic affairs are his ne- 
potism towards his half-brothers and his wife's relations; his 
straining the rights of the crown during the vacancy of abbeys 
and bishoprics, by committing waste on the ecclesiastical de- 
mesnes; and his practice of heaping prodigal grants on his 
favourite clerks. But during his long reign England grew 
greatly in opulence, in public spirit, and in practical freedom, 
and became the home of a nation, while before it was a battle- 
field for hostile races and a scene of atrocious oppression. 

The reign of Edward the First presents few exceptional 
facts to the historian of prices. The period was disturbed 
by no important social change, although it was marked by 
many legal innovations, and by the developement of that poli- 
tical system which has, though modified by time, remained 
to the present day. The new method of entails, and the 
abolition of the right of subinfeudation, originally enacted, it 
would seem, in order to secure certain privileges which were 
being imperilled by the subdivision of land in fee, have had 
a lasting effect on the social system of this country. But it 
does not appear that entails were general before the fifteenth 
century; and it cannot be doubted that the check to the 


--page 7 INTRODUCTORY.

practice of subinfeudation was indirectly matter of that policy 
which relieved England from feudal wars, though dictated 
perhaps in the first instance by a protective impulse. The 
discussion, however, of these legal novelties lies within the 
province of the jurist, rather than in that of the economist ; 
and the more so, since the operation of either law must have 
been slow, and the social changes gradual. 

Towards the close of the thirteenth century, sheep were, 
for the first time, affected by a new disease, which has been 
handed down to our own times, under the name of scab. 
The specific for this complaint, so serious to the landowner, 
was in the first place verdigris, copperas, and quicksilver, but 
in the last few years of the same century tar-dressing was 
adopted, and has been, I believe, uninterruptedly employed 
from that to the present time. 

The political convulsions and intrigues which occurred 
during the reign of Edward's son were accompanied by severe 
privations, consequent on a series of unproductive harvests. 
Never perhaps in the whole period before us were the suffer- 
ings of the English peasantry greater. Besides the misery of 
the famines, they had to suffer the insolence and rapacity of 
Edward's favourites, and especially of the younger Spenser; 
the extravagance of the court, whose expenditure was, for 
the times, enormous, and the scandalous condition in which 
the country was placed by the feebleness and indecision of 
the king. During the last years, however, of Edward's reign 
some of these evils were alleviated. 

The earlier years of Edward the Third's reign were, on the 
whole, economically speaking, prosperous. The harvests were, 
on an average, abundant, and though the country was em- 
barked in a foolish and wasting war with France, the neces- 
sities of the situation brought about intimate commercial 
intercourse with the great Flemish manufactories, and ulti- 
mately led to the developement of much industrial prosperity 
in Norfolk, and some other eastern counties. It is possible 
that the war in which Edward embarked might have ter- 


--page 8 INTRODUCTORY. 

minated differently, and the victory of Poitiers have been as 
pregnant of events as that of Hastings, had it not been for 
the Black Death. 

I shall attempt below to describe the calamity which visited 
England, after it had wasted the greater part of Central 
Europe. The first incidence of no plague was ever so de- 
structive, the effects of none have been so singular. It swept 
away half the people, according to some estimates. It cer- 
tainly created an economical revolution. Banished at last, 
after occasional outbreaks for several centuries, from Western 
Europe, in consequence of improvements in the sanitary con- 
ditions of society, it still lingers in the east, and the oriental 
plague of the Levant and Egypt is the legitimate successor 
of the Black Death. Its ravages in France were as destruc- 
tive as those in England, but the weakness induced upon 
the latter country made the resuscitation of French inde- 
pendence possible. 

The plague bore its fruit at home in the insurrection of 
the peasantry at the beginning of the reign of Richard the 
Second. The rebellion was put down, but the demands of 
the villains were silently and effectually accorded; as they 
were masters for a week of the position, the dread of an- 
other servile war promoted the liberty of the serf; and the 
close of the fourteenth century sees the small freeholder, and 
probably the tenant in villenage, such important personages 
in the social order, as to be competent for the possession of 
those large political rights which are embodied in the election 
statute of Henry IV. It is with the second year of this suc- 
cessful usurper's reign that the economical history of these 
volumes is concluded. 

The method which I propose, in dealing with the facts 
contained in the second volume, is to comment, in the first 
place, on the leading features of medieval agriculture, and 
the rate of production from the soil. The state of society, 
as estimated from economical considerations, will demand 
some attention, and I shall seek, as far as the scanty mate- 


--page 9 INTRODUCTORY.

rials allow me, to shew how wealth was distributed in Eng- 
land during the fourteenth century. It will be needful also 
to discuss the moneys, the weights, and the measures of the 
time, a subject on which some variety of opinion has pre- 
vailed; and to determine, as far as possible, the proportion 
which such moneys bore to present values. 

From these general considerations I shall pass to actual 
prices. Of these the most important are corn and labour, 
partly because they bear most nearly upon the social history 
of the time, partly because they can be estimated with the 
greatest precision. Thence I shall proceed to comment on 
the prices of agricultural stock and produce, and of the mate- 
rials necessary for the industrial occupations of the time, 
the subsistence of the labourer, and the supply of such con- 
veniences as a rude manufacture and an undeveloped com- 
merce afforded. 

The tables of averages, and other numerical statements, 
have been prepared with as much care and precision as my 
abilities permit. I shall state the method which I have 
adopted in each case, and as it is quite possible that abler 
analysts may examine the figures which I have collected, I 
leave them to determine whether my inferences are correct. 
The facts of the second volume are far more important than 
the comments of the first. 

In order to make the tables as suggestive as possible, I shall 
reduce the values of the most important among the series to 
grains of silver, premising that the same value has been as- 
signed throughout to the nominal currency, on the ground 
that the issues of the mint were, in large payments at least, 
corrected by the all but universal practice of weighing the 
specie employed in the transactions of trade. 

In conclusion, I shall attempt to tabulate certain prices, 
with a view to exhibiting the purchasing power of money at 
certain dates in the period before us, so as by these means 
to supply opportunity for comparison with the facts of later 
times. It will be admitted that the historical value of such 


--page 10 INTRODUCTORY. 

facts as may be collected, and such inferences as may be made 
from them, will be relative to the social progress, and occa- 
sionally to the social retrogression, of the people. 

We shall find that, commencing with a period in which 
population was, when compared with the rate of production, 
large, the nation was affected by great scarcity in the begin- 
ning, and unexampled mortality at the middle, of the fourteenth 
century. The effects of the former visitation were transient, 
of the latter permanent, and, as might be expected on grounds 
of antecedent probability, the condition of the masses of the 
community was greatly elevated by the calamity of the plague. 
With these changes the present volumes close, at an epoch 
in which the feudal aristocracy was seriously embarrassed, and 
the yeomanry was acquiring strength and importance. 

If I may be permitted to anticipate the facts of the centu- 
ries which follow those which I have now to lay before my 
reader, it may be stated, that the husbandman reaped the 
harvest of the internecine struggle which commenced in the 
middle of the fifteenth century. The great war of succession 
almost destroyed the feudal aristocracy, by its expences, its 
forfeitures, its proscriptions. It was carried on by the barons ; 
for the crown, the possession of which was the ostensible ob- 
ject of the conflict, was utterly impoverished. After this 
suicide of the aristocracy, the crown became all powerful, 
and created a new nobility on the ruins of the church. By 
causes wholly different from those which ruled before, the 
mass of the people were losers by the Reformation. They 
recovered themselves slightly in the seventeenth century, and 
had a golden age during the first half of the eighteenth. But 
within the time of our fathers they have been depressed again 
and the peasant has again become a serf, and the yeoman 
has disappeared in the absorption of nearly all the land of 
England by a small number of great proprietors. 


--page 11

CHAPTER II. 

MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE. 

The accounts from which the prices contained in the se- 
cond volume are extracted, contain abundant evidence of the 
state of agriculture in the thirteenth and fourteenth centu- 
ries; and as nearly all the English counties are represented 
in the aggregate of the documents, we find that the process 
of cultivation varied little throughout the country. The same 
kinds of grain, with hardly any exception, are sown in the 
north and the south; the same kind of labour is needed, and 
the same method of culture is adopted. Similarly the accounts 
kept of farming and farm produce, the weights and measures, 
the order of the entries, and the names used to designate 
stock and implements, are identical, or nearly so, in any two 
estates, however locally remote they were. Such an identity 
could not have been effected unless the communication be- 
tween different parts of England had been far more free and 
full than it is generally supposed to have been at that time, 
or than it actually was three centuries afterwards. 

Nor, again, are there any important variations traceable in 
the method of culture, the kinds of seed sown, the character 
of stock. In certain districts indeed rye was more freely cul- 
tivated than in others: in some barley formed the principal 
crop. There are, however, hardly any farms on which some 
breadth of wheat, barley, and oats were not sown, or where 
all kinds of stock were not kept. 

Similarly the distribution of land, and the tenure by which 
it was occupied, are generally uniform. Local habits, origin- 
ally perhaps local privileges, caused some differences in tenure 
in particular places; for instance, in the county of Kent, in 
which it appears customary service was unknown. I have 


--page 12 MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE.

never found a trace of it on Kentish estates, many of which 
have been examined for the purposes before me in compiling 
the evidence in the second volume. 

The parish or manor in the period before us was divided 
into four portions : first, the lord held, together with his feudal 
rights over the whole, except the glebe of the parson or im- 
propriator, a demesne which he cultivated by his bailiff: se- 
condly, there were the small estates possessed by the free- 
holders, who paid quit-rents : thirdly, there were the tenements 
and lands of villains, bordarii, or cotarii : and lastly, the waste, 
or common, over which all tenants had right of pasture, and 
sometimes of turf. The estates of the villains were frequently 
as extensive as those of the freeholders, and were always, as 
far as I have found, held at fixed and commutable services, 
the commutation being determinate, but accepted only at the 
pleasure of the lord, who could exact the service, if he pre- 
ferred to do so, just as the tenant might, if he saw fit, proffer 
his service instead of the money payment. 

The buildings belonging to the lord consisted of manor- 
house and grange. The manor-house contained at least three 
principal rooms — the hall, the dormitory, and the solar; 
and during the absence of the lord was occasionally inhabited 
by the bailiff: the lord making periodical visits to his several 
manors, for the purpose of inspecting his estate, and taking 
account of the proceeds. The hall was the chamber used for 
the manor court ; for receiving homage ; for inflicting or levy- 
ing fines; and, in case the lord had the high jurisdiction, 
that is, the right of fossa and furca, pit and gallows — the 
former for female, the latter for male culprits — was the scene 
of judicial sentence. Here too the youth were registered in 
the decenna, and the view of frankpledge was held. 

The solar was the state chamber, the parlour of the farm- 
house fifty years ago; built generally, as its name implies, 
towards the south. The solar in the manor-house of Holy- 
well in Oxford is thus constructed. Excellent specimens of 
the Norman manor-house are still to be seen in the house 


--page 13 MEDTEVAL AGRICULTURE.

called Pythagoras Hall, on the north side of Cambridge, a 
building belonging to Merton College, and part, it appears, 
of the founder's patrimony; and in John of Gaunt's and the 
Jew's House at Lincoln. 

As might be expected, the furniture of the manor-house 
was scanty. Glass, though by no means excessively dear 
(vol. ii. p. 535. 547. iii. 574, iii.), appears to have been rarely 
used. A table put on tressels, and laid aside when out of 
use, a few forms and stools or a long bench stuffed with 
straw or wool, covered with a straw cushion worked like a 
beehive, with one or two chairs of wood or straw, and a chest 
or two for linen, formed the hall furniture. A brass pot or 
two for boiling, and two or three brass dishes; a few wooden 
platters and trenchers, or more rarely of pewter; an iron or 
latten candlestick; a kitchen knife or two; a box or barrel 
for salt; and a brass ewer and basin, formed the moveables 
of the ordinary house. The walls were garnished with mat- 
tocks, scythes, reaping-hooks, buckets, corn-measures, and 
empty sacks. The dormitory contained a rude bed, and 
but rarely sheets and blankets, for the gown of the day was 
generally the coverlet at night. 

In the inventory of John Senekworth's effects, who was for several 
years bailiff for Merton College at their manor of Gamlingay in 
Cambridgeshire, as well as at other places before, we find a larger 
variety. Senekworth was evidently a valued servant of the College 
(one of his brothers was a fellow) ; for a few years before his death 
the society presented him with five pounds, " ex speciali gratia soci- 
orum." The date of the inventory is 13 14, the deceased bailiff having 
bequeathed his goods to the college. It contains a tapetum, valued 
at 7s., two others at 5s., one more at twenty-pence; 6 lintheamina 
(sheets) at four shillings each, and a materace at one shilling ; a red 
coverlet at two shillings ; a counterpane (co-opertorium pro lecto) at 
four shillings ; a red gown at eight shillings, another at three 
shillings ; a blue gown at four shillings ; a kaynet gown at two shil- 
lings and sixpence ; a russet tunica at one and sixpence ; a banker, 
i. e. a cover for a seat, at fifteen-pence ; a table-cloth at one shilling ; 


--page 14 MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE. 

two more and, two napkins at six shillings three quisins, i. e. cushions, 
at ninepence each. Besides these articles of linen and clothing, 
Senekworth possessed three gold rings, one of which was broken, 
the whole being valued at eighteen-pence ; a purse at fourpence ; 
a pouch at threepence ; a knife at a penny ; a forcer, that is, a chest, 
at three shillings, and another at sixpence ; a leathern forcer at three- 
pence; two glasses (murræ), one with a silver stand, worth seven 
shillings, a second, eightpence; four silver spoons, valued at three 
shillings and twopence; two silver seals (firmacula), two shillings, 
one of these being mounted by a gilded penny as a symbol; three 
books of romance, valued at threepence ; two pair of linen panni 
at a shilling ; a basin and ewer at a shilling ; besides some less 
characteristic effects. Senekworth, however, must have been an 
official of more than usual opulence and social position. 

The dairy was annexed to the manor-house, and the cheese 
and butter, though an important source of income, was the 
cheapest part of agricultural produce, as measured by modern 
experience. The furniture of the dairy was composed, as in 
our own day, of pail, milk-pan, churn, cheese-press, cheese- 
shape, butter-mould, and straining-cloths. Rennet (coagula), 
though generally produced on the farm, was occasionally pur- 
chased. On some estates a register is kept of the days and 
months in which cheese-making was carried on, and the 
amount made at the different parts of the year. The cheeses 
were, it appears, small, to judge from the price of the several 
formæ in which they were shaped (vol. ii. p. 6i8). The largest 
could not have weighed more than from six to eight pounds. 
Butter, besides being pressed into gallon tubs or jars, was 
made, as in modern times, into pats; at least we read of 
formæ for butter, which seem to be the same with the pat- 
terns used at present (vol. ii. 568. i. 569. iv.), and we may be 
able to trace the same fact in the disci of vol. ii. p. 599. 
This part of the medieval farm was under the management 
of a deye, or dairy-woman. 

The grange contained the grain kept in stock. Towards 
the close of the year this is generally very low. It was laid 


--page 15 MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE.

up in this building either in sheaf, or threshed and stored in 
sacks. These sacks were of very various sizes, not as now, 
containing generally four bushels. Some of the crops were 
stored in ricks, called mayæ, or moyæ, a word which still 
lingers in the rural 'mow.' Threshing was then, as it re- 
mainedtill our time, when it has been almost superseded by 
machinery, the chief farm-work of the winter. 

In vol. ii. p. 665, a list is given of the stock transferred to 
the new bailiff of the Holywell Manor, Oxford, on the re- 
moval of his predecessor; and the bailiff's roll of Cuxham, 
p. 617, gives a similar list. It seems that four horses or oxen 
were ordinarily assigned to each plough, the ploughing horses 
used being generally called affri, and, judging from their 
price, of an inferior kind. The plough was plainly of rough 
and cheap construction, the costliest parts of the fabric being 
the share and the iron tips called ferripedales, with which 
the wooden frame of the share was protected. These plough- 
shares were of various value : a distinction being made between 
summer and winter shares. The few notes given in pp. 606-8 
shew that a dry season, and the consequent wear of iron in 
ploughing, were important events in the economy of the 
farm. The coulter was rarely used, or, at any rate, is very 
rarely quoted. 

The land was generally ploughed twice, the latter plough- 
ing being called rebinatio. Half the arable estate, as a rule, 
lay in fallow, called warectatio in the language of the time. 
Occasionally the sheep of a neighbouring farm were hired to 
lie on the ground, and so to fertilize it. The rate at which 
this service was paid may be seen in vol. ii. 578. iv. 580. 
ii.iii. From the last entry it would seem that eight weeks 
were considered necessary in order to get land in good order 
by these means. 

It is probable that the ploughing was very shallow. The 
high price of iron, and the rudeness of the ancient plough, 
preclude the notion that the soil was turned over very 
effectually. 


--page 16 MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE. 

I have never found any separate payment made for the 
labour of sowing, and am disposed to believe that this duty 
was performed by the bailiff himself. Fifty years ago it was 
generally done by the small farmer in person. The receptacle 
for the seed was known by the name of seedlep, or more 
rarely seedcod. The rate sown was about two bushels to the 
acre of wheat and rye, four bushels of barley, bere or drage, 
and oats, two bushels of beans, peas, and vetches. Beans 
were generally dibbled by women. Wheat and some kinds of 
barley were sown in the winter, and called semen hyemale, 
but most of the barley and other kinds of grain in the spring, 
and called semen quadragesimale. 

I find no trace of harrowing or rolling. But corn was 
hoed, sometimes by customary service, occasionally by hired 
labour. It is possible that the hoeing was used as much to 
break the clods and cover the seed as to remove weeds. 
The implements used are mattocks and hoes (herciæ). 

Hay was mown partly by the regular servants of the farm, 
partly by the customary tenants, partly by hired labour. This 
labour was often obtained from a distance. It appears that 
when the grass was mown the task of tedding and cocking 
the hay was performed by persons on the spot, for it rarely 
happens that this service is priced. The hay was gathered 
into ricks, and, as at present, cut into trusses. It is hardly 
needful to observe that the grass was all native. It was long 
after the period before us that artificial or foreign grasses 
were introduced. Hence the means for supporting winter 
stock depended upon the supply of hay, and such straw as 
was available for the animals kept on the farm. The bailiflf^ 
calculating his resources, killed down for salting, at about 
St. Martin's day (November 11th), as many sheep, oxen, and 
calves as exceeded his means of sustenance. 

The business of harvest was the most important in the 
year, and, as at present, occupied a month or six weeks, 
according to the season. 

The corn appears to have been cut rather high on the stalk,


--page 17 MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE.

for it is frequently the case that the stubble is mown after 
the crop is gathered. The wages paid for reaping will be 
adverted to below. It will be seen that the money payments 
made to the hired servants of the farm were considerably 
higher in the harvest term or quarter than at other times. 
The labourers were generally allowed beer, were frequently 
fed, and on some manors feasted at the termination of the 
harvest. A pig for the farm labourers invariably figures in 
the charges incurred for autumn on the Wolrichston estate. 
The same estate supplies the labourers in the same time with 
two red herrings a day. 

After the harvest was over pigs and geese were turned 
into the stubble. For a certain payment the swine belonging 
to the villagers were permitted the run of the fields. In the 
Cuxham account, vol. ii. p. 618, the charge on this head is 
found among the receipts. It is one of yearly recurrence, 
but never of any important amount. 

As might be expected, in the absence of artificial grasses 
and winter roots, natural meadow was exceedingly valuable, 
and bore, comparatively speaking, a high rental. A record 
of the rates at which the acre of grass was sold will be found 
in vol. ii. pp. 179, 180. The greater part of the area from 
which this grass was procured is still occupied as meadow. 
The second crop of grass, or aftermath, is called rewannum, 
and was, of course, of far less value than the spring crop. 
Perhaps the rate paid for an acre of grass in Holywell, Oxford, 
was enhanced beyond its customary amount in consequence 
of its nearness to the town. 

The manor-house possessed a garden and orchard. But the 
former was very deficient in vegetables. The householder of 
the thirteenth and fourteenth century grew onions and leeks, 
mustard, and garden or green peas. He probably also possessed 
cabbage, though I have never found either seed or plants 
quoted. Apples, and sometimes pears, are mentioned as part 
of the orchard produce, but we read of no plums, except once 
of damsons. A regular part of the produce of the orchard was 


--page l8 MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE. 

cider, and its low price seems to suggest that it was made 
in considerable quantities. Sometimes, too, wine was grown 
in England, though not, perhaps, so frequently as has been 
imagined, the word vivarium having been, it appears, often 
read as vinarium. Crabs were collected in order to manu- 
facture verjuice — an important item in medieval cookery. 
Bees, though honey was dear and wax very high priced, do 
not seem to have been commonly kept, though some few 
entries of hives and swarms have been found. 

None of the servants were, it would seem, maintained in 
the house, except occasionally during harvest. Robert Old- 
man, the bailiff of Cuxham, in the account printed in vol. ii., 
was one of the villains of the manor, though his position 
suggests that an officer, to whose hands so much was entrusted, 
could not have been the serf without rights or property, which 
our historians are accustomed to consider the villain of that 
epoch to have been. The Oldmans, father and son, were 
bailiffs of this manor during the greater part of the time 
in which it was farmed by the college{^a}. 

The bailiff appears to have regularly attended the markets. 
The Cuxham bailiff goes to Henley-on-Thames, the river 
being, in the middle ages, permanently navigable to London, 
it seems, from this point only. One of the customary services 
on this manor is that of carriage to Henley. 

The regular farm servants, after the bailiff, were the plough- 
men and drivers, one to each plough, the carters, the cow or 
oxherd, the pig-keeper, and the dairy-woman. In case sheep 
were kept, one or two shepherds were engaged. All these 
persons had land and stock of their own. The dairy-woman 
often purchases the calves, the shepherd has his own little 
flock, and is occasionally remunerated by permission to use 
the lord's pasture. 

The stock on the farm is varied. Horses, oxen, cows, and 

{^a} Similarly, ii. 611. ii., it is clear from the entry given, that the bailiff of 
Stillington was a serf of the house, for it was from such persons only that the lord 
was entitled to exact a fine on a daughter's marriage or a son's education. 


--page 19 MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE.

poultry are almost universally found. Sheep are not always 
kept. They are not found, for instance, on the Holywell, 
Cambridge, and Elham estates. On the first named estate it 
was found advantageous to sell the standing grass: on the 
last, Merton College bred horses, or at least trafficked largely 
in them. A singular example of the latter transactions will 
be found in vol. ii. p. 203. ii. 

Annexed to this chapter will be found a table of the pro- 
duce of corn sown, and of the average under cultivation in 
the years 1333-1336 inclusive, in particular localities. The 
eleven estates specified, though not the whole endowment of 
Merton College, constitute the whole of that which they held 
in hand and farmed on their own account. A second table 
supplies information as to the amount of stock kept on each 
estate during the same years, and the losses by disease under 
the generic name 'murrain.' The first three in the list are 
situated in Surrey, the fourth in Kent, the fifth and sixth in 
Cambridgeshire, the seventh in Bucks, the eighth in Warwick, 
the ninth and tenth in Oxfordshire, the last in Hants. The 
inferences are, therefore, derived from a wide area, namely, 
the south-eastern and southern counties, and the facts may 
be taken as fairly typical. 

Hedging and ditching, the latter operation with a view 
to draining the soil, were frequent expedients in medieval 
agriculture. Where stone was available and easily laminated, 
trenches were dug, and a rude drain was formed by laying 
large stones in the course. Marling too was common, of 
course, on stiff soils, more frequent indeed than the few 
notices given of the practice in vol. ii. pp. 454, 455, might 
suggest. Lime was also used for dressing land. It is hardly 
necessary to say, that the only manure commonly employed 
was that of the stable and farm-yard. StifF lands, on which 
water was apt to lie, were ridged. 

In order to carry on the necessary business of the estate, 
the lord was obliged to leave considerable sums in the custody 
of his bailiff. The aggregate amount of the liabilities debited 


--page 20 MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE. 

to the bailiffs of the estates contained in the subjoined table 
is, for the year 1333, £100 11s. 9d.; for 1334, £121 1s. 6½d.; 
for 1335, £120 13s. 3¼d.; for 1336, £120 4s. 3d. In the last 
three years the amount of indebtedness is increased by the de- 
ficiency in the accounts of the Elham officer. In 1337, the 
debt due from this bailiff, which had stood for some time at 
upwards of £47, reached nearly £62, and formed one of the 
grounds of complaint embodied in the Scrutiny printed in 
vol. ii. pp. 670—674. On the whole, however, apart from the 
capital value of the stock, the society of Merton College were 
constrained to leave at least a sixth part of their net income 
in the hands of their farm agents. 

DEBITS.
++-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
=|             |     1333.     |     1334.    |     1335.    |     1336.    |
++-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
+|             |    £  s.  d.  |   £  s.  d.  |   £  s.  d.  |   £  s.  d.  | 
+| Maldon      |    4  18  4¾  |  11   7  5¾  |   5   1  7   |   8  14  8¼  |
+| Letherhead  |    2   0  0   |   2  13  8½  |   1  19  1½  |   1   3  9¼  |
+| Farley      |    3   6  5½  |  20  18 11¾  |   3  19 10¾  |   4  14  6   |
+| Elham       |   18   1  8   |  27  10  0¾  |  47  13  0   |  47  12  3¾  |
+| Cambridge   |   11   8  1¾  |   7  15  6¼  |   4   2  1½  |   9  12  4   |
+| Gamlingay   |    5   8  3   |   2  17  2½  |   6   3 10½  |   1  14  1¾  |
+| Cheddington |   13  11  8¼  |   4   7  6¼  |   3  18 10¼  |   2   6  9¼  |
+| Wolford     |    7  14  0   |   4  18  5¾  |  18  19  4   |  10   0  3½  |
+| Cuxham      |   21  12  9¾  |  19  16  7½  |  11  11  7¾  |  16  11  9¾  |
+| Holywell    |   12  13  8¼  |  18   8  3¾  |  17   1  8   |  16   8  1¾  |
+| Basingstoke |(owing) 3  5¼  |       7  9   |   0   2  2   |   1   5  5½  |
++-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+

On an estate like that of Maldon, which, during the three 
years contained in the subjoined account, cropped 273, 269. 3, 
264, and 277. 2 acres and roods respectively, the capital 
necessary for carrying on operations must have amounted to 
upwards of £100 in money of that time. The corn used for 
seed was, at the average price of corn, worth about £19 : 
the live stock, from similar averages, must have reached about 
£55, and the dead stock would have been worth from £15 


--page 21 MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE.

to £17. There must also be reckoned the money-wages of 
labour, the allowances to servants, the cost of wear and tear, 
especially in tools and agricultural implements, and the 
charges of the harvest, besides a variable sum for insurance 
or loss, no inconsiderable item, as the reader will observe by 
glancing at the annual deaths by murrain, the generic name 
for all fatal diseases and accidents to live stock. 

On the other hand, there are items, cheese, butter and 
eggs, wool, fuel and fagots, and the increase of stock by 
breeding, which swell the receipts. The profit on growing 
corn must, owing to the exceedingly meagre return to the 
seed, have been very small, and the advantages obtained by 
the medieval agriculturist can only have been derived from 
the returns of his farm stock. As we proceed, we shall find 
reason to believe, that while the cost of corn, owing to the 
low rate of production, was high, and the price necessarily 
considerable, the market value of all other farm produce, wool 
and hides excepted, was singularly low, and obtainable in 
plenty by the general community. In these times, I con- 
clude, the culture of the soil for corn crops was a necessity 
and not an advantage; and the general distribution of land 
drove the greater proprietors to such kinds of cultivation as 
would not have been before them except under such circum- 
stances, and which were abandoned when the practical inde- 
pendence of all landowners led them in the sixteenth century 
to extensive sheep farming{^b}. 

The value of timber, and especially fuel, was comparatively 
high. Periodical sales were made of the larger trees, and 
a portion of the underwood, fit for hurdles or fagots, was 
regularly cut every year, as, for instance, at Letherhead and 

{^b} It might be possible to give an estimate of the percentage of profit on agri- 
culture during the period before us. It is certain that it fell far below the ordinary 
rate of interest on money. But, as in a state of society like that which existed in 
the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, and indeed for a long time after, rates of 
profit and interest were not and could not be relative, a calculation as to the amount 
of the former would only lead to false impressions, and it is better to state the facts 
of the case only. 


--page 22 MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE. 

Maldon. The sale of timber was announced to the public 
of the neighbouring towns by a crier. (See ii. 610. i.) This 
official also cried stolen cattle. (612. i.) 

The rate of profit on agricultural operations, taken in the 
aggregate, and carried on under the management of a bailiff, 
was, I conclude, exceedingly low ; so low, indeed, as to 
make it certain that even a slight change in the circum- 
stances which surrounded the earlier system of agriculture 
would wholly alter its method, and ultimately bring about a 
complete revolution in the social condition of the great mass 
of the community, immediately or speedily after the new set 
of circumstances was recognized. The change took place in 
the middle of the fourteenth century, and among the earliest 
to take advantage of the altered circumstances, and adapt 
their policy to what constituted the immediate interest of the 
society, were the warden and scholars of Merton's College. 

The founder of this society, in establishing so singular a 
novelty as a college or corporation of wholly secular students, 
upon whom there was laid no condition of entering into 
holy orders, and who were to be {_ipso facto_} deprived of his 
benefaction if they took the vows of any among the mo- 
nastic bodies, seems to have had many purposes before him. 
He wished, among other objects, to make his warden an 
active as well as a wealthy and dignified official, and yet, 
by giving the fellows a virtual jurisdiction over any misbe- 
haviour or negligence on his part, to render him perpetually 
responsible. He wished his fellows to be students in the 
fullest sense of the word, and yet appointed so many officers 
in his society, that every one who enjoyed his benefaction 
would be called upon to go through a considerable amount 
of real business. The estates belonging to the society were 
widely scattered, and were visited periodically. The most 
minute and varied examination of income and expenses was 
taken, and the debtor and creditor account, as far as possible{^c}, 

{^c} I say as far as possible, for the use of Roman numerals was a serious hindrance 
to accuracy in striking a balance. The extreme slowness with which the decimal or 


--page 23 MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE.

elaborately balanced. Every device was adopted which would 
tend to enlarge the income of the foundation. The founder's 
object in urging upon his fellows the duty of economizing 
their resources, of avoiding legal procedure, and of insisting 
that all decisions of the college authorities, as to the status 
of its members, should be without appeal, was to continually 
increase the number of persons who might share his bene- 
faction. It will be seen in the Scrutiny given in the second 
volume, pp. 670-674, how fully the fellows apprehended their 
duty in this direction, and the archives of the society prove 
that the injunctions of the Visitor, from very early times, were 
issued in order to enforce the obligation. 

The fellows of Merton in the thirteenth and fourteenth 
centuries were very shrewd and active men. They were all 
trained to business, and they strove, as far as possible, to 
make the most of their means. They seem to have sympa- 
thized with the great enemy of those orders of monks, from 
association with whom their statutes so rigidly forbad them. 
The private history of Wiklif is very obscure. He has been 
claimed by Queen's and Balliol, on the strength of his sur- 
name appearing in the domestic accounts of those societies, 
for it is very seldom that the members of any college were 
designated by their baptismal names. It is notorious that 
these names were often changed. But the fellows of Merton 
believed that Wiklif was one of their body. He is specially 
designated in a list of the fellows compiled in the first year 
of Henry the Sixth, and the date of his election, no other 
fellow being thus distinguished, is added to his name. In 
the days of that regency, when John of Bedford was at the 
head of affairs, and Lollardism was very unpopular in high 
quarters, and the government was preparing to revolutionize 
the franchise, by limiting its exercise to the forty-shilling 

Arabic system of numerals was adopted, is a striking illustration of the difficulty there 
is in effecting the general use of an essential reform. The Roman method must have 
been singularly inconvenient, and yet, though Arabic numerals are found in the latter 
end of the thirteenth century, they were not employed familiarly for calculation 
till the end of the sixteenth. 


--page 24 MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE.

freeholder; and Lincoln College was being founded in order 
to supply a perpetual succession of enemies to the doctrines 
of Wiklif, (for Fleming had been once a follower of the great 
reformer, and hated him and his memory and his associates 
at about the time when he became Bishop of Lincoln, and 
hated him most heartily when he intrigued to become Arch- 
bishop of York): in such a time, the acknowledgment that 
Wiklif had been one of the fellows of Merton was just that 
kind of confession which deserves credit. At any rate, the 
fellows of Merton were popularly called Lollards up to the 
early part of the eighteenth century. 

Before the great plague the college had leased some of its 
lands. They let their estate at Ibstone for thirty-five years 
in 1300, and that of Gamlingay for fourteen years from the 
same date. Basingstoke was let for twenty-one years from 
1310; and Wolford had probably been farmed in the same 
manner, as the earliest bailiff's roll of this estate is in the 
year 1322, and contains no statement of arrears, one of the 
most characteristic signs of the commencement of a new 
system of occupation. The northern estates were let as early 
as 1280, and the college never farmed on its own account 
its lands in Leicestershire. 

After the plague most of the lands were let. The wages 
of labour, despite the restrictions put on them by the statute 
of 1350, rose so considerably that it was no longer profitable 
to hold and cultivate by bailiff. Corn, it is true, was dear, 
for between the years 1349 and 1376 the average price of 
wheat was only three times below 5s. 6d., whereas in the next 
twenty-five years it was sixteen times below that amount. 
But even the high prices of wheat were insufficient to com- 
pensate the enhanced cost of labour, and the college let its 
lands on lease, at the best possible terms. 

These leases were peculiar. The stock was let with the 
land, either in whole or part, the rents being in money or 
corn. The tenant on the expiry of his lease was bound to 
return the same amount of seed corn and of live and dead 


--page 25 MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE.

stock as he received, or their estimated value. The leasing 
of cattle and sheep on these terms was very common before 
the plague. One of the most familiar resources of the lord 
is the firma vaccarum. Cows were let at 5s. a-year. 

For instance, in a lease of the college lands at Farley, 
granted in 1360, the tenant took two horses and seven affri, 
valued at ten shillings each ; a bull reckoned at ten shillings ; 
ten cows, each at eleven shillings ; four oxen, each at eighteen 
shillings and fivepence ; twenty-four quarters of wheat, at six 
shillings and eightpence ; six and a half of sprig, at four shil- 
lings; three quarters and a bushel of frumentum vescosum, 
at four shillings ; three quarters three and a half bushels of 
barley, at four shillings and eightpence; two of peas and 
two of vetches, at three shillings and fourpence; and forty- 
nine and a half of oats, at two shillings. 

This kind of tenure, closely analogous to the métairie of 
South-western Europe, prevailed for a short time in England. 
It is abandoned about fifty years after its commencement, 
not indeed simultaneously, but generally, after such an in- 
terval from its having been adopted on any estate. Thus, 
with hardly an exception, the Merton estates are let on the 
ordinary method of lease for years, at or about the be- 
ginning of the fifteenth century. But New College, which 
persisted on many of its estates in carrying on the old system 
of cultivating by bailiff till the end of the first quarter 
of the fifteenth century, does not get out of the land and 
stock leasing till a considerable time beyond the middle 
of that century. The leases are all short, and fines are 
unknown. 

A corporation could not or would not alienate its lands. 
Hence the estate was preserved intact. But a very different 
set of causes must have operated upon the lands of the feudal 
lords. There can be no doubt that these were largely ali- 
enated in small parcels. Many causes contributed to this 
result. The price of labour continually rose, the price of 
food continually fell, and hence the small occupier became 


--page 26 MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE. 

more prosperous and independent. The habits of the land- 
owners in the reign of Richard the Second were expensive, 
for the nobles emulated the court. The rent of land was 
very low, for the produce was worth very little more than 
the cost of production. 

By far the most important source of revenue possessed by 
the landlords of these days were the quit-rents levied on free 
tenants, and the compositions for services enacted from the 
villenage. Actual servitude had long passed away, and pre- 
carious possession with it. The option of taking labour for 
land, instead of the pecuniary equivalent, still belonged to 
the landowner, and was, no doubt, leased to the farmer with 
the domain. It is clear that an attempt to enforce the 
alternative of labour was one of the most powerful stimu- 
lants to the great uprising of the serfs. The victory remained 
nominally in the hands of the king and nobles : it was actu- 
ally and very rapidly appropriated by the serfs. 

It is very probable that grants of domain were made at 
new quit-rents. Such an alienation was not an invasion of 
the statute Quia emptores, and we know how general fee- 
farm rents became. These fixed rents representing, at their 
first creation, high rates for the use of land, were easily 
borne when, in the fifteenth century, agriculture improved, 
and the condition of the yeomanry became more prosperous. 
But the enquiry into these changes cannot be anticipated 
in these volumes. It is sufficient to shew that the causes 
which led to that general prosperity among the mass of the 
people, which is commented on by Fortescue, had their be- 
ginnings in the close of the fourteenth century. 

It will be seen that the largest part of the land under 
the plough was occupied by crops of wheat, barley, and oats. 
Wheat was the customary food of the people of this country 
from the earliest times. Even if the evidence were not 
abundant on this point, the breadth sown annually would be 
conclusive proof. Barley was sometimes mixed with wheat 
in the allowances made to farm servants, but its chief use 


--page 27 MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE.

was in the manufacture of beer, which seems to have been 
continually brewed in small quantities, and for immediate 
consumption. Wheat is sometimes, but rarely, malted. Oat 
malt is much more common. The chief use of oats was for 
horse food, but oatmeal was made for the broth or porridge 
of the house. 

Rye was very scantily cultivated. An occasional crop on 
many estates, it is habitually sown on few. It is regularly 
sown in Cambridgeshire, and some other of the eastern coun- 
ties. As the period before us passes on, it becomes still 
more rare, and, as will be seen below, some of the later 
years of this enquiry contain no entries of its purchase and 
sale. 

A peculiar kind of barley, called drageum, is very generally 
cultivated, especially in the eastern counties. This is pro- 
bably bere. Sprig appears to be another name for this kind 
of grain; and it is likely that bericorn, berimancorn, and 
some other forms of the name represent a grain identical 
with drageum, or closely related to it. At least the rate of 
seed to the acre favours such a view. Drage, like barley, 
was made into malt, and is often thus specified in the ac- 
counts. 

The three leguminous plants, beans, peas, and vetches, were 
generally, but not extensively, cultivated ; the average being 
small in every case. Peas, however, are more frequent than 
the other kinds, as will be seen from the second volume, and 
from the table of average prices. They are grey, black, and 
white, the last being, of course, the most valuable. Some- 
times they are specially designated as pig-peas. They were, 
I think, generally used for fattening hogs. It seems that 
peas and beans are occasionally sown together, perhaps other 
kinds of grain also. 

Wheat and vetches appear to have been sown together, 
especially at Farley, if, indeed, this be the interpretation of 
what the Records call frumentum vescosum or vessetum. 
Bullimung, which occurs early, is said to be a mixture of 


--page 28 MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE. 

oats, peas, and vetches. It forms a regular crop at Horn- 
church. 

Hemp was cultivated to some extent. The seed is fre- 
quently entered, but no record of the crop or of its desti- 
nation is to be found. I am disposed to think that it was 
employed for the home manufacture of ropes, but I have 
never seen any entry of payment for such kind of labour. 
It may have been hackled and woven by the servants of the 
farm, the labour forming part of the regular work expected 
from them. It could not, I am certain, have been sold with- 
out being entered. On one occasion it is quoted as having 
been purchased to feed pigs, a hazardous experiment ! 

The question, whether, within the records of historical 
times, any change in the ordinary temperature of these 
islands can be certainly traced, is one which cannot but in- 
terest those who enquire into the facts and conditions of 
medieval agriculture. Geological periods, it would seem, 
though certainly numerous, are separated by prodigious dis- 
tances, and cover vast spaces of time. Changes, though real, 
are hardly perceptible, because procession or retrogression, 
submergence or upheaval, are too slow for our unassisted 
powers of observation, and need, therefore, that these powers 
should be exercised in the most cautious manner, and be 
sustained by the aid of the most exact appliances. Unless, 
therefore, we had the means of measuring changes almost 
atomic, which modern science possesses, we could do no more 
than guess at any alteration in the seasons, or any intensity 
or diminution of the aggregate amount of solar heat, which 
six hundred years ago might have affected these islands. 

It would seem that if any change, to judge from the evi- 
dence before us, has taken place in the physical constitution 
of this country within the last six hundred years, it may be 
inferred to consist in a slight diminution of the annual heat. 
I take it for granted that effective drainage heightens and 
that standing water lessens the average temperature. I do 
not doubt that far more land was wet in the thirteenth than 


--page 29 MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE.

in the sixteenth, and vastly more than in the eighteenth, 
century. Again, it is generally admitted, that tracts of 
forest land, though they may, in particular positions, afford 
shelter, do, if we estimate the average of annual tempera- 
ture, depress the total amount of solar heat{^d}. There can 
be, I think, no doubt, that while ornamental wood was 
scarce in the thirteenth century, and long afterwards, natu- 
ral forest was abundant, and occupied considerable tracts or 
belts. 

Now, it is said that the cultivation of wheat was not, 
till within the last hundred years, carried on successfully 
beyond the north bank of the Humber, and that the chief 
cereal produce in the northern counties was oats. This rule 
holds good still on the western side of the island. In Arthur 
Young's time, indeed, (Northern Journal, vol. iii. p. 378,) 
land was cropped with wheat to some extent on the north- 
east side of the island, but in much less quantity than in 
the southern counties. But it is clear that wheat was grown 
in Northumberland and Durham during the thirteenth and 
fourteenth centuries. 

Again, the vine was cultivated, and wine was manufac- 
tured from home-grown grapes, as far north as Ditchingham 
in Norfolk{^e}. Nor is the price at which the produce is sold 
indicative of the quality being much inferior to ordinary 
Bordeaux or Gascony. A vine is bought for the king's house 
at Woodstock, in 1265. (ii. 594. i.) At the present time, 
however, it would be hardly possible, I imagine, to ripen 
English grapes sufficiently for the production of the thinnest 
beverage. Vineries were attempted in many of the southern 
counties, and the record of such cultivation lingers in local 
names. Thus, for instance, near the road from Petersfield 
in Hampshire to Eastmeon in the same county, there is a 
steep hollow in the downs, having a south-by-west aspect, 
which still goes by the name of 'The Vineyard Holm.' 

The accounts which I have consulted contain but little 

{^d} Lyell's Principles of Geology, cap, vii.

{^e} ii. 548. ii. 


--page 30 MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE. 

allusion to the seasons. Droughts are said to have occurred 
in the spring and summer of 1284, 1325, 1331, 1344, 1362, 
1374, 1377. The most serious of these must have been that 
of 1325, for it is alluded to at once in the east, the midland, 
and the western counties. Whenever a note is taken of such 
an occurrence, it is generally done in order to explain the 
fact that more than ordinary cost has been incurred for 
iron. Similarly, when a wet harvest is noted, it serves to 
account for the duration of the time occupied by this opera- 
tion, or the increased charge incurred for threshing. And in 
the same way, the prevalence of disease among sheep or cattle 
is commented on, because it created a greater demand and a 
higher price for medicaments, or explained losses of stock. 

The period comprised in these volumes is too scanty to 
enable me to hazard any opinion as to what may constitute 
a cycle of the seasons. Hereafter, perhaps, when the evi- 
dence of the whole time for which I purpose to collect facts 
is supplied, it may be possible to discover some signs of re- 
currence, and similar sequence. It cannot be doubted, that 
even though no record of the seasons be supplied, the rise 
and fall in the money price of the chief necessary of life, 
wheat, will suffice to indicate, with sufficient exactness, the 
plentiful or scanty produce of any year. It would be of 
greater moment if such an enquiry could enable us to form 
inductions for the future from the history of the past. 

The live stock kept on the several farms comprised, as 
has been observed, horses, cattle, sheep, pigs, and poultry. 
Both horses and oxen were used for draught and for plough- 
ing. Cows were kept for butter, cheese, and milk ; the dates 
at which cheese was manufactured being frequently men- 
tioned in the accounts. The calves were generally sold, but 
sometimes kept for stock. 

The various losses of stock suffered by the agriculturist 
were called by the generic name of 'murrain.' From the 
foot notes appended to the catalogues of stock printed below, 
it will be seen that this name was not only given to fatal 


--page 31 MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE.

disorders, but to accidents, though the chief risks were those 
of disease. The treatment of horses was the business of 
the mareschallus or farrier; and the well-known complaints, 
farcy, lampas, and spavin, are mentioned in the accounts. 
Maudlaung, ii. p. 579. i., is a more obscure disease. Bleeding 
was a customary method of practice. 

Among the diseases peculiar to sheep, the scab is very 
frequently mentioned. This disease made its appearance at 
or about the year 1288, and became endemic. It was at 
first treated with copperas and verdigris, but in time, that 
is, at about the close of the thirteenth century, it was dis- 
covered that tar (generally called bitumen in the accounts, 
but occasionally by its English name) was a specific for the 
complaint. Shortly after this time, the purchase of tar is a 
regular entry. It is clear that the remedy was mixed with 
butter or lard, and then rubbed in. Note is occasionally 
taken of any exceptional prevalence of this disease, which 
seems never to have been eradicated, but only to have varied 
in intensity and frequency. 

The reader will understand that the lambing season was 
as anxious a time for the medieval agriculturist as it is now. 
The ewes were sheltered, and received the unremitting at- 
tention of the shepherd. The information which I can give 
of the price of candles is tolerably full : it would have been 
very scanty had it not been for purchases made {_tempore 
agnellationis_}. With every care, however, the losses were 
very heavy. 

The sale of wool and woolfells was the chief profit of the 
farmer. Hence, when arable land was abandoned to the 
lessee, the lord generally retained the sheep farming. Merton 
College did so on its Northumberland estate, long after the 
cultivation of the soil was left in other hands. New College 
did so at Birchanger and Takley. The early relinquishment 
of border-farming is, no doubt, to be ascribed to the thieves 
of the Scotch marches, against whom a remote proprietor 
was likely to be very undefended, while the Northumbrian 


--page 32 MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE. 

farmer would probably be able to hold his own. But the 
continuance of sheep and wool farming, on the part of the 
landlords, was due to the great and increasing value of the 
raw material. Wool, as we see from the Southampton ac- 
count, ii. 6ii. i., was occasionally stored in the church. It 
was rammed into packs ; and the table given of the price 
of canvas will supply instances of the purchase of material 
for the purpose. The sale of wool was not always effected 
by the bailiff], even when the rest of the produce was left 
in his hands for disposal. Plentiful as the evidence is which 
has been collected for the price of this important article of 
medieval produce, it would have been much more abundant 
had the record of transactions been written on the docu- 
ments preserved. Very often, however, we read that the 
wool was delivered into the hands of an officer appointed 
specially for the purpose of negociating the sale ; but the 
account of the sale has not been found. 

Hides, except obtained from cattle who had died of 'mur- 
rain,' were not often part of the proceeds of the farm. The 
fullest information obtained as to their value is taken from 
the records of consumption. The flesh of animals who died 
of disease was often sold and eaten. 

The pig was the most important article of food. We shall 
find below that the relative price of pigs is fully proportionate 
to modern values. The sides (bacons) and the hams (pernæ) 
were salted and smoked in autumn and winter. Pig-skins 
are occasionally quoted; but I do not know whether their 
ancient was similar to their modern use. 

Among poultry we find fowls, geese, ducks almost univer- 
sally; peacocks and swans rarely. The low price of poultry 
suggests that they were kept by the poorest classes. Eggs, 
in particular, are exceedingly abundant, and no great varia- 
tion occurs in their price in consequence of locality. On 
some manors a large number of pigeons were kept, which 
were perhaps as great a grievance as in France before the 
Revolution. 


--page 33 MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE.

The reader will find that rats and moles were considered 
nuisances in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, and that 
payment was made for catching and destroying them. The 
value of arsenic, as a means for extirpating these pests, was 
known. We read, too, of stoats and their depredations, of the 
losses incurred by wolves and foxes, and of the charge to 
which one manor was put in inviting the king's foxhunters 
to destroy the last-named vermin. Rabbits do not seem to 
have been plentiful, at least the price paid for them is rela- 
tively exceedingly high; and I have never found any entry 
of the sale or purchase of hares or pheasants. I do not doubt 
that they existed, as they are mentioned in chronicles and 
recited in deeds, but they never form part of the accounts 
which have come before me. 

Mills were generally possessed by lords of manors, and in 
all likelihood the use of the village mill was compulsory on 
all the inhabitants, that is, on all who owed suit and service 
to the lord. These mills were either worked by water or 
wind power, the latter being the most frequent motive force. 
The reader will find a large body of evidence in the second 
volume illustrating the price of canvas for millsails, and 
of the various kinds of millstones. Towards the latter part 
of the period the information on the price of millstones be- 
comes deficient. The fact is, the mill and its privileges 
were farmed early in the period before us; and though, for 
a time, the owner supplied stones and repairs to his tenant, 
it was not long before the farmer took this responsibility 
upon himself. The miller, it appears, was remunerated by 
a toll taken on the corn which was ground, and the item 
'mill-corn' appears perpetually in the records of such estates 
as possessed mills. The right of having a water-mill was a 
franchise, and could not be invaded without liability to 
action for damages or fine in the manor court : but it is 
not clear whether a similar limitation applied to wind-mills. 
The construction, however, and maintenance of a mill in- 
volved a considerable outlay, and when the mill was let to 


--page 34 MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE. 

farm the rent was heavy. Malting was carried on in the 
mill, or in its neighbourhood ; and occasionally it appears 
that a fine was exacted on such tenants as malted their own 
barley privately. 

In conclusion, the art of medieval husbandry differs from 
that of later times by its deficiencies. The land was im- 
perfectly drained; the working of the soil was shallow; the 
manures employed were limited to stable dung, to lime or 
marl, and to sheep-dressing. Scanty as the crop was, it seems 
to have been very exhausting, for half the land, in ordinary 
cases, lay in fallow. Roots and artificial grasses were un- 
known. Such crops as were obtained, scanty as they were 
in amount, were not procured except at large relative ex- 
pense, and any notable addition to the wages of labour or 
the cost of production so greatly diminished the value of 
land as to cause a revolution in its tenure. The rent of 
land, since it rises and falls as the cost of production dimin- 
ishes or increases, was very low, and could not be increased 
except by such improvements in the cost of agriculture as 
were very distant from the experience of that time. 

It is probable that in such parts of England as were, for 
the resources of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, fully 
peopled, not much less land was regularly under the plough 
than at present. It is true that the system of fallows was ne- 
cessarily practised; and it seems that when old pasture land 
of indifferent quality was broken up, it was exhausted for 
some time by a single crop, and was forthwith returned to 
pasture. But there is even now abundant evidence of an- 
cient culture in lands which have time out of mind been 
used as pasture. Wherever ridge and furrow are seen in 
pasture, there the land has been, at some time or the other, 
under the plough; and, as is well known, the marks of such 
culture are exceedingly permanent, indeed can be effaced 
only at great cost. So, much land on the Southdowns, which 
has not borne grain crops in the memory of man, retains 
unmistakeable traces of ancient cultivation. The exigencies 


--page 35 MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE.

of medieval society left little ground, which could be avail- 
able for cultivation, for park or pleasure, and upland pasture 
must have been of little value. 

The Tables annexed are intended to suggest what was 
the rate of production ; what the average under cultivation, 
with the proportion of seed sown; and what was the stock 
kept on the several estates which, at that time, were culti- 
vated by the bailiffs of Merton College, for the profit of 
that society. 

The original is a long roll, written on both sides, and 
containing an account for four consecutive years. It com- 
prises the amount of corn and other agricultural produce 
obtained in each year; and states summarily how it was 
disposed of by sale, in seed, or in consumption on the farm ; 
and acknowledges the remainders under each head as debits 
to the college. It also states the number of cattle, sheep, 
and poultry kept, with the losses of the year; and the pro- 
duce of wool, &c. : presenting a minute and accurate ré- 
sumé of the whole condition of the college estates, in so 
far as they were farmed by the society. 

The upper table in each page of the first series, pp. 38-45, 
states the amount of corn grown on each estate in quarters, 
bushels, and pecks. The lower gives the acreage, generally 
calculated in acres and roods, with the seed sown on the 
area under cultivation. Sometimes the acreage is left out, 
as, for instance, in the account for the year 1333-4, on the 
Wolford and Holywell lands. But such cases present little 
difficulty. The rate of seed wheat is always two bushels, or 
a little more, to the acre; of barley, drage, and oats, four; 
and of other grain, as with wheat ; and the most important 
inference, the rate of production to seed sown, is supplied. 

The other tables contain accounts of stock and produce 
other than grain, and suggest, when taken with the amount 
of land under cultivation, what was the amount of such 
stock which could be maintained on the produce of the 


--page 36 MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE. 

arable estate and the pasture, either held by the lord of the 
manor, or grazed in common with the cattle of the free- 
holders and villains of the manor. 

It will be seen from the statements of stock and produce, 
that horses of some kind formed part of the complement of 
each farm. They are designated either as equi cartarii or 
affri, and in some cases, as the foot-notes shew, the bailiff's 
nag or hackney is reckoned with the rest of the stud. 

There can be no doubt that affri were a kind of horses 
employed especially in husbandry, and that they were pro- 
bably the progenitors of those coarse ill-shaped animals which 
are still seen in some country places. The horses quoted 
in the catalogue of stock at Wolford and Basingstoke, of 
the year 1334, are the affri of the following year. On the 
other hand, affri are distinguished from horses on other 
estates, probably because the latter were larger and better 
bred. We shall see below that the price of the horse is 
always higher than that of the affer. 

In the tables of price of stock given in the second volume, 
pp. 183-270, I have always put 'stotts' under the head of 
'cattle,' In modern provincial language a 'stot' is a young 
ox. But I suspected, when I recognized the low rate at 
which the hides of these animals were sold, that I had been 
in error in assigning them to that species. Ducange con- 
siders stots, or stods, though his quotations are not conclu- 
sive, to be low-bred stallions. I am disposed to think that 
the interpretation is correct, because the hide is of such 
slight value. 

The horses kept for breeding and sale at Elham are not 
reckoned in the schedule. These animals, always intended, 
it seems, for riding, were, we must conclude, under other 
management than that of the bailiff, though they are in- 
cluded in his account. See ii. 232. ii., 233. ii. It may be 
observed, too, that the entry of produce in the first year from 
Elham includes the tithe-wheat collected on that estate. 

The number of cattle kept is considerable, but the breed. 


--page 37 MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE.

as I have stated elsewhere, was small. The largest amount, 
after Maldon, is found at Cuxham ; and the arable on this 
estate was about one hundred and eighty acres annually. 

On three of the estates no sheep are kept. Elham, indeed, 
was chiefly valuable for its tithe. Cambridge and Holy- 
well (Oxford) were chiefly cheese and butter farms, near 
towns, and therefore employed more profitably even than in 
growing wool. 

On other estates the sheep are distinguished as ewes, 
muttons, i. e. wethers, hoggasters, or two-year olds (the two- 
year old ewe is called jercion), and lambs. It seems that 
some of the farms bred, others fatted, sheep. Thus, at Gam- 
lingay in 1335, the whole stock is wethers. It may be ob- 
served, that in these times the fleece was worth nearly as 
much as the sheep. As a rule, one ram is kept for thirty 
ewes. 

Fowls are kept on all estates: capons on most. 

I shall advert below, in treating on the price of wool, to 
the fact that wool entries are scanty. But the evidence 
supplied here will indicate how light the fleece was. The 
wool is given in cloves of 7 lb. and fractional pounds. 

Lastly. I have stated the annual losses for which the 
bailiffs take credit. They are occasionally enormous, and, 
happily, far removed from ordinary experience in our own 
time. 

Such accounts are, it is hoped, sufficient specimens of the 
method in which estates were generally cultivated before 
those changes in the bailiff system which were induced by 
the great plague of 1348. 


--page 38 MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE. 

PRODUCE. Autumn, 1333.
++-------------+--------------------+--------------------+----------------------+--------------------+
=|             |        Wheat       |       Barley       |     Sprig, Drage,    |         Rye        |
 |             |                    |                    |       Bericorn       |                    |
 +-------------+--------------------+--------------------+----------------------+--------------------+
+|             |     qr. bsl. pk.   |     qr. bsl. pk.   |       qr. bsl. pk.   |     qr. bsl. pk.   |
+| Maldon      |    134.  5.  1.    |     14.  5½.  .    |         .   .   .    |     21.  5.  1.    |
+| Letherhead  |     57.  7.   .    |     89.  2.   .    |  S.   12.  1.  3.    |      2.  6.  3.    | 
+| Farley      |    106.  3.  2.    |     35.  4.  2.    |  S.   36.  4.  2.    |       .   .   .    |
+| Elham       |     89.  6.  2.    |     43.  2.  2.    |         .   .   .    |       .   .   .    |
+| Cambridge   |     42.   .   .    |       .   .   .    |  D.   53.   .   .    |       .   .   .    |
+| Gamlingay   |     38.  1.  1.    |       .   .   .    |  D.   89.  5.  3.    |     48.  3.  3.    |
+| Cheddington |     91.  5.   .    |     66.  2.  2.    |  D.   22.  4.   .    |       .   .   .    |
+| Wolford     |     99.  7.   .    |     98.  4.   .    |         .   .   .    |       .   .   .    |
+| Cuxham      |    202.  1.   .    |     22.  2.   .    |  D.   34.  4.   .    |       .   .   .    |
+| Holywell    |     38.  7.  3.    |    247.  4.  3.    |         .   .   .    |     28.  2.  3.    |
+| Basingstoke |     40.   .   .    |     21.  2.   .    |  B.   42.  4.   .    |       .   .   .    |
++-------------+--------------------+--------------------+----------------------+--------------------+

Seed sown and acreage under cultivation.
++-------------+--------------------+--------------------+----------------------+--------------------+
+|             | acreage.   seed.   | acreage.   seed.   |   acreage.   seed.   | acreage.   seed.   |
 |             | ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.| ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.|   ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.| ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.|
+| Maldon      | 103.  .  32. 2.    |   8.  .   4.  .  . |      .  .    .  .  . |  19½. .   6.  .  . |
+| Letherhead  |  68.  .  17. 6.    |  33½. .  17.  .  . | S.  4.  .   1. 5.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+| Farley      |  80.  .  25. 6.    |  13.  .   6. 4.  . | S. 14.  .   5. 2.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
 |             |   Frum vesc.       |                    |                      |                    |
 |             |   9½. .   3.5½.    |                    |                      |                    |
+| Elham       |    .  .    .  .  . |   9½. .   8. 2.  . |      .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+| Cambridge   |  40. 1.  13. 6.    |    .  .    .  .  . | D. 35½. .  18. 5.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+| Gamlingay   |  43.  .  13. 3. 2. |    .  .    .  .  . | D. 61.  .  30. 4.  . |  33.  .   8. 5.  . |
+| Cheddington |  66.  .  18. 2. 2. |  18.  .   7. 6. 2. | D.   .  .   1. 6.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+| Wolford     |    .  .   6. 6.    |    .  .    .  .  . | D.   .  .   3. 4.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+| Cuxham      |  93. 1.  27. 4.    |    .  .   2.  .  . | D. 26.  .  11.  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+| Holywell    |    .  .   3. 6.    |    .  .  43.  .  . |      .  .    .  .  . |    .  .   4. 2.  . |
+| Basingstoke |  26.  .   6. 4.    |  24.  .   9.  .  . | B. 28.  .   9.  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
++-------------+--------------------+--------------------+----------------------+--------------------+


--page 39 MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE. 

PRODUCE. Autumn, 1333.
++--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
=|        Oats.       |        Beans.      |        Peas.       |       Vetches.     |       Mixtil.      |
++--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
+|     qr. bsl. pk.   |     qr. bsl. pk.   |      qr. bsl. pk.  |     qr. bsl. pk.   |     qr. bsl. pk.   |
+|    176.  3.  1.    |     18.  4.  2.    |      21.  4.   .   |      .   .   .     |       .   .   .    |
+|     71.   .   .    |       .  7.   .    |       8.  3.   .   |      2.  5.  2.    |      4.  2.   .    |
+|    126.  5.  2.    |       .  3.   .    |       2.  6.  2.   |      1.  7.  1.    |       .   .   .    |
+|     91.  2.  2.    |      2.  4.   .    |      33.  2.  2.   |     52.  2.  2.    |       .   .   .    |
+|      8.  3.   .    |      2.  4.   .    |        .   .   .   |       .   .   .    |     13.  5.   .    |
+|                    |    Beans and Peas  |                    |                    |                    |
 |       .   .   .    |      6.  2.   .    |        .   .   .   |       .   .   .    |       .   .   .    |
+|      9.  4.  2.    |     33.  7.   .    | Pulse  .  3.  3.   |       .   .   .    |       .   .   .    |
+|                    |    Beans and Peas  |                    |                    |                    |
 |     22.  4.  1.    |     28.  5.  3.    |        .   .   .   |       .   .   .    |     43.  5.  2.    |
+|     86.  5.  2.    |       .   .   .    | Grey  7.  2.  2.   |       .   .   .    |       .   .   .    |
+|     24.  5.   .    |       .   .   .    |        .   .   .   |       .   .   .    |       .   .   .    |
+|     14.  3.   .    |       .   .   .    |        .  4.   .   |       .  4.   .    |       .   .   .    |
++--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+

Winter and Spring, 1333-4. 
++--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
+| acreage.   seed.   | acreage.   seed.   | acreage.   seed.   | acreage.   seed.   | acreage.   seed.   |
 | ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.| ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.| ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.| ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.| ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.|
+|  21.  .  60. 4.  . |  13½. .   6. 6.  . |   8.  .   2. 4.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+|  39.  .  19. 4.  . |    .  .    . 2.  . |   8.  .   2.  .  . |   7.  .   1. 7. 2. |   1.  .   2. 2.  . |
+|  66.  .  32. 2.  . |    .  .    . 2.  . |   4.  .   1.  .  . |   5½. .   1. 3. 1. |    .  .    .  .  . |
+|    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    . 4.  . |   3.  .   1. 3. 2. |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+|   5.  .   2. 4.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+|                    |   Beans and Peas   |                    |                    |                    |
 |    .  .    .  .  . |  13.  .    . 4. 6. |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+|  22.  .  10. 2.  . |  11½. .   5. 0. 1. |  11.  .   3. 3.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+|                    |   Beans and Peas   |                    |                    |                    |
 |    .  .   1. 6.  . |    .  .   5. 3. 3. |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+|                    |                    |        Grey        |                    |                    |
+|  48.  .  21.  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |   7.  .   1. 7. 3. |   2.  .    . 4.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+|    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+|  29.  .  13. 2.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    . 4.  . |    .  .   1. 2.  . |   6½. .   3. 1.  . |
++--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+


--page 40  MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE. 

PRODUCE. Autumn, 1334.
++-------------+-----------------------+--------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
=|             |          Wheat        |       Barley       |     Sprig, Drage,    |          Rye         |
 |             |                       |                    |       Bericorn       |                      |
++-------------+-----------------------+--------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
+|             |       qr. bsl. pk.    |     qr. bsl. pk.   |       qr. bsl. pk.   |      qr. bsl. pk.    |
+| Maldon      |      127.  5.  1.     |     11.  6.  3.    |         .   .   .    |      20.  0.  2.     |
+| Letherhead  |       47.  6.   .     |     53.  1.  3.    |  S.    3.  6.  3.    |        .   .   .     |
+| Farley      |       95.  3.  3.     |     20.   .   .    |  S.   18.   .   .    |        .   .   .     |
 |             |  F.V.  9.  2.   .     |                    |                      |                      |
+| Elham       |         .   .   .     |     28.  1.  2.    |         .   .   .    |        .   .   .     |
+| Cambridge   |       53.  4.   .     |       .   .   .    |  D.   73.  2.   .    |        .   .   .     |
+| Gamlingay   |       32.  6.   .     |       .   .   .    |  D.   50.  3.   .    |      55.  6.   .     |
+| Cheddington |       78.  4.   .     |     49.  2.   .    |  D.    4.   .   .    |        .   .   .     |
+| Wolford     |       58.  5.  2.     |       .   .   .    |  D.   60.  4.   .    |        .   .   .     |
+| Cuxham      |      176.  4.   .     |     10.  3.  3.    |  D.   50.  6.   .    |        .   .   .     |
+| Holywell    |       25.  6.   .     |    192.  7.   .    |         .   .   .    |      37.  2.   .     |
+| Basingstoke |       19.  1.   .     |     21.  4.   .    |  B.   23.  4.  2.    |        .   .   .     |
 |             |                       |                    |  D.    8.  4.   .    |                      |
++-------------+-----------------------+--------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

Seed sown and acreage under cultivation.
++-------------+-----------------------+--------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
+|             | acreage.      seed.   | acreage.   seed.   |   acreage.   seed.   | acreage.     seed.   |
 |             | ac. rd.     qr.bsl.pk.| ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.|   ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.| ac. rd.    qr.bsl.pk.|
+| Maldon      | 115.  .     36.  .  . |  12.  .   6.  .  . |      .  .    .  .  . |    .  .      .  .  . |
+| Letherhead  |    .  .     18. 4.  . |    .  .  19. 6.  . | S.   .  .   1. 7.  . |    .  .      .  .  . |
+| Farley      |  44.  .     14.  .  . |  13. 3.   6. 7.  . | S. 15½. .   5. 7.  . |    .  .      .  .  . |
 |             |   Frum vesc.          |                    |                      |                      |
 |             |   6.  .      2. 2.  . |                    |                      |                      |
+| Elham       |   3. 1.      1. 4.  . |   9.  .   7. 6.  . |  .   .  .    .  .  . |    .  .      .  .  . |
+| Cambridge   |  22. 1.      7. 1.  . |    .  .    .  .  . | D. 34. 1.  22. 7. 2. |   4.  .     1. 4.  . |
+| Gamlingay   |  45.  .     12. 5.  . |    .  .    .  .  . | D. 43½. .  22. 1. 2. |  42½. . {^a}5. 7.  . |
+| Cheddington |  40. 3. {^a}11. 3. 2½.|  20.  .  10.  .  . | D.  2½. .   1. 3.  . |    .  .      .  .  . |
+| Wolford     |  41. 3.      8. 3. 2. |    .  .    .  .  . | D. 14½. .   5. 1.  . |    .  .      .  .  . |
+| Cuxham      |  89.  . {^b}29. 6.  . |   4.  .   1. 6.  . | D. 16.  .   7. 5.  . |    .  .      .  .  . |
+| Holywell    |    .  .      8. 7. 2. |    .  .  30. 6.  . |  .   .  .    .  .  . |    .  .     3. 7. 3. |
+| Basingstoke |  23.  .      5. 6.  . |  17.  .   6. 3.  . | B. 33½. .  10. 4. 2. |    .  .      .  .  . |
 |             |                       |                    | D.  9.  .    . 4.  . |                      |
++-------------+-----------------------+--------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

{^a} Super acram ij bsls. j pecke.
{^b} Super acram 2½ bsls. plus in toto vij bsls. dim:


--page 41  MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE. 

PRODUCE. Autumn, 1334.
++--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
=|        Oats.       |        Beans.      |        Peas.       |       Vetches.     |       Mixtil.      |
++--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
+|     qr. bsl. pk.   |     qr. bsl. pk.   |      qr. bsl. pk.  |     qr. bsl. pk.   |     qr. bsl. pk.   |
+|    137.  3.  2.    |     13.  3.  1.    |       7.  1.  3.   |       .   .   .    |       .   .   .    |
+|     34.  6.  2.    |       .   .   .    |       2.  3.   .   |      1.  3.  1.    |      1.  0.  2.    |
+|    102.  7.   .    |       .  4.   .    |       5.  1.  2.   |      3.  5.   .    |       .   .   .    |
+|       .   .   .    |      3.   .   .    |      28.  5.  2.   |     25.  3.   .    |       .   .   .    |
+|       .   .   .    |       .   .   .    |        .   .   .   |       .   .   .    |       .   .   .    |
+|       .   .   .    |       .   .   .    |      15.  2.   .   |       .   .   .    |       .   .   .    |
+|     24.  3. 1 .    |       .   .   .    |      24.  0.  1.   |       .   .   .    |       .   .   .    |
+|     18.  3.   .    |       .   .   .    |      45.  1.   .   |       .   .   .    |       .   .   .    |
+|     87.  0.  1.    |       .   .   .    | Grey 14.  1.   .   |       .  3.   .    |       .   .   .    |
+|       .   .   .    |       .   .   .    |        .   .   .   |       .   .   .    |       .   .   .    |
+|     25.   .   .    |       .   .   .    |       1.  4.   .   |      1.  2.   .    |       .   .   .    |
++--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+

Winter and Spring, 1334-5. 
++--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
+| acreage.   seed.   | acreage.   seed.   | acreage.   seed.   | acreage.   seed.   | acreage.   seed.   |
 | ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.| ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.| ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.| ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.| ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.|
+| 121. 1.  60. 5.  . |  12.  .   6.  .  . |   6½. .   2.  .  . |   3.  .    . 6.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+|    .  .  18.  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .   2. 2. 2. |    .  .   1. 2. 1. |    .  .    . 7.  . |
+|  70.  .  35. 4.  . |    .  .    . 1. 2. |   3.  .    . 6.  . |   6.  .   1. 4.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+|    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+|   6.  .   3. 6.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |   9.  .   2. 6.  . |   1.  .    . 3.  . |  16.  .   5. 2.  . |
+|    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |  17.  .   8. 3.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+|  11½. .   5. 6.  . |    .  .   2.  .  . |  26.  .   8. 1.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+|    .  .   4. 3.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .   3. 4. 1. |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+|                    |                    |        Grey        |                    |                    |
 |  57. 1.  23. 2.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |  15.  .   4. 1. 3. |   1.  .    . 3.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+|    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+|  21.  .  10.  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |   5.  .   1. 1.  . |   6.  .   1. 2.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
++--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+


--page 42  MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE.

PRODUCE. Autumn, 1335.
++-------------+--------------------+--------------------+----------------------+--------------------+
=|             |        Wheat       |       Barley       |     Sprig, Drage,    |         Rye        |
 |             |                    |                    |    Haras, Bericorn   |                    |
++-------------+--------------------+--------------------+----------------------+--------------------+
+|             |     qr. bsl. pk.   |     qr. bsl. pk.   |       qr. bsl. pk.   |     qr. bsl. pk.   |
+| Maldon      |    155.  4.  2.    |     23.  1.  2.    |         .   .   .    |       .   .   .    |
+| Letherhead  |     56.  7.  2.    |     53.  4.  2.    |  S.    3.  2.  3.    |       .  7.   .    |
+| Farley      |     73.  1.  3.    |     25.  2.   .    |  S.   17.  5.  1.    |       .   .   .    |
 |             | F.V. 8.  3.   .    |                    |                      |                    |
+| Elham       |      4.  2.   .    |     23.  1.  2.    |         .   .   .    |       .   .   .    |
+| Cambridge   |     29.  3.   .    |       .   .   .    |  D.   46.  2.   .    |      3.  4.   .    |
+| Gamlingay   |     42.  3.  1.    |       .   .   .    |  D.   48.  1.   .    |     16.  7.   .    |
+| Cheddington |     38.  7.  2.    |     45.   .   .    |  D.    4.  1.   .    |       .   .   .    |
+| Wolford     |     80.  7.   .    |       .   .   .    |  D.   73.  2.   .    |       .   .   .    |
+| Cuxham      |    166.  7.  2.    |      8.   .   .    |  D.   31.   .   .    |       .   .   .    |
+| Holywell    |     56.   .   .    |    193.  5.   .    |   .     .   .   .    |     46.  2.  2.    |
+| Basingstoke |     22.  6.   .    |     16.  4.   .    |  B.   21.  4.   .    |       .   .   .    |
 |             |                    |                    |  D.    7.  2.   .    |                    |
++-------------+--------------------+--------------------+----------------------+--------------------+

Seed sown and acreage under cultivation.
++-------------+--------------------+--------------------+----------------------+--------------------+
+|             | acreage.   seed.   | acreage.   seed.   |   acreage.   seed.   | acreage.   seed.   |
 |             | ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.| ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.|   ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.| ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.|
+| Maldon      | 101.  .  31. 4.  . |   8.  .   4.  .  . | H. 22.  .   8. 2.  . |    .  .    . 3.  . |
+| Letherhead  |    .  .  15. 1.  . |    .  .  19. 1.  . | S.   .  .    . 6. 1. |    .  .    . 3.  . |
+| Farley      |  78.  .  24. 2.  . |  12.  .   6. 1.  . | S. 19.  .   7. 2.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
 |             |   Frum vesc.       |                    |                      |                    |
 |             |  16.  .   6. 1.  . |                    |                      |                    |
+| Elham       |   3. 1.   1. 3. 2. |  10.  .   4. 4.  . |      .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+| Cambridge   |  22½. .   7. 1.  . |    .  .    .  .  . | D. 32.  .  19.  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+| Gamlingay   |  59.  .  16. 3. 2. |    .  .    .  .  . | D. 43½. .  21. 6.  . |  31½. .   8. 6.  . |
+| Cheddington |  49.  .  13. 6. 1. |  23.  .   9. 6.  . | D.  2. 1.   1. 1.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+| Wolford     |  36. 2.   7. 4. 3. |    .  .    .  .  . | D. 19.  .   7. 0. 2. |    .  .    .  .  . |
+| Cuxham      |  89. 1.  19. 0. 1. |    .  .    .  .  . | D. 26.  .  13.  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+| Holywell    |  16.  .   4. 6.  . |  85. 1.  43. 5.  . |      .  .    .  .  . |  12½. .   5. 0. 2. |
+| Basingstoke |  30.  .   7. 3.  . |  13.  .   4. 7.  . | B. 30.  .   9. 6.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
++-------------+--------------------+--------------------+----------------------+--------------------+


--page 43 MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE

PRODUCE. Autumn, 1335.
++--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
=|        Oats.       |        Beans.      |        Peas.       |       Vetches.     |       Mixtil.      |
++--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
+|     qr. bsl. pk.   |     qr. bsl. pk.   |      qr. bsl. pk.  |     qr. bsl. pk.   |     qr. bsl. pk.   |
+|    198.   .   .    |       .   .   .    |        .   .   .   |      3.   .   .    |       .   .   .    |
+|     47.  3.   .    |       .  7.   .    |       8.  6.   .   |      3.  6.  3.    |      4.  1.   .    |
+|    106.  5.   .    |      1.  0.  1.    |       5.   .   .   |      6.  0.  3.    |       .   .   .    |
+|       .   .   .    |      2.  4.   .    |        .   .   .   |     25.   .   .    |       .   .   .    |
+|                    |    Beans and Peas  |                    |                    |                    |
 |     12.  7.  1.    |      7.  3.   .    |        .   .   .   |     28.  6.  2.    |     15.  3.   .    |
+|       .   .   .    |       .   .   .    |      18.  1.   .   |       .   .   .    |       .   .   .    |
+|     19.  2.  2.    |      6.   .   .    |      29.  2.   .   |       .   .   .    |       .   .   .    |
+|     24.  7.   .    |      3.  2.   .    |      40.  3.   .   |       .   .   .    |     20.  2.  2.    |
+|     78.  5.  1.    |       .   .   .    | White  .  6.   .   |       .  3.   .    |       .   .   .    |
 |                    |                    | Grey 17.  4.  3.   |                    |                    |
+|       .   .   .    |       .   .   .    |        .   .   .   |       .   .   .    |       .   .   .    |
+|     10.  6.   .    |       .   .   .    |       6.  1.   .   |      2.  6.   .    |       .   .   .    |
++--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+

Winter and Spring, 1335-6. 
++--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
+| acreage.   seed.   | acreage.   seed.   | acreage.   seed.   | acreage.   seed.   | acreage.   seed.   |
 | ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.| ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.| ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.| ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.| ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.|
+| 130.  .  65.  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |   1½. .    . 3.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+|    .  .  22. 3.  . |    .  .    . 7.  . |    .  .   1. 7.  . |    .  .   2. 1.  . |    .  .    . 7½. . |
+|  60.  .  30.  .  . |    .  .    . 1. 2. |   5.  .   1. 2.  . |   6½. .   1. 5.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+|    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    . 6.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |   2. 1.   1. 1.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+|                    |   Beans and Peas   |                    |                    |                    |
 |   8.  .   4.  .  . |   4.  .   1. 3.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    . 3.  . |   4½. .   1. 4.  . |
+|    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |  17½. .   6. 3.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+|   7½. .   3. 6.  . |  20.  .  10. 4.  . |  14.  .   4. 3.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+|   8. 2.   2. 6.  . |  10.  .   3. 2.  . |   9. 1.   2. 3.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |   9. 2.   2. 4.  . |
+|                    |                    |       White        |                    |                    |
 |  47.  .  22.  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |   3.  .    . 7.  . |    .  .    . 3.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
 |                    |                    |        Grey        |                    |                    |
 |                    |                    |  11½. .   3. 7. 1. |                    |                    |
+|    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+|  16.  .   7. 5. 2. |    .  .    .  .  . |   3.  .    . 6.  . |  11.  .   2. 6.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
++--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+


--page 44  MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE.

PRODUCE. Autumn, 1336.
++-------------+-----------------------+--------------------+----------------------+--------------------+
=|             |          Wheat        |       Barley       |     Sprig, Drage,    |         Rye        |
 |             |                       |                    |    Haras, Bericorn   |                    |
++-------------+-----------------------+--------------------+----------------------+--------------------+
+|             |       qr. bsl. pk.    |     qr. bsl. pk.   |       qr. bsl. pk.   |     qr. bsl. pk.   |
+| Maldon      |      106.  4.   .     |     12.  3.   .    |  H.   18.  1.  1.    |      2.  0.  2.    |
+| Letherhead  |       25.  2.   .     |     49.  2.  1.    |         .   .   .    |      8.  1.  1.    |
+| Farley      |       61.  0.  3.     |     24.  0.  3.    |  S.   13.  6.   .    |       .   .   .    |
 |             | F.V.  11.  4.  3.     |                    |                      |                    |
+| Elham       |        6.   .   .     |     31.  5.   .    |         .   .   .    |       .   .   .    |
+| Cambridge   |       29.  3.   .     |       .   .   .    |  D.   42.   .   .    |       .   .   .    |
+| Gamlingay   |       43.  4.  2.     |       .   .   .    |  D.   61.  5.  1.    |     25.  1.   .    |
+| Cheddington |       45.  2.   .     |     52.  7.   .    |  D.    3.  4.   .    |       .   .   .    |
+| Wolford     |       65.  6.   .     |       .   .   .    |  D.   78.  6.   .    |     33.  4.   .    |
+| Cuxham      |      168.  7.   .     |       .   .   .    |  D.   36.  0.  2.    |       .   .   .    |
+| Holywell    |       17.  1.   .     |    235.  0.  2.    |         .   .   .    |     56.  3.   .    |
+| Basingstoke |       30.  4.   .     |     16.   .   .    |  B.   31.  1.   .    |       .   .   .    |
++-------------+-----------------------+--------------------+----------------------+--------------------+

Seed sown and acreage under cultivation.
++-------------+-----------------------+--------------------+----------------------+--------------------+
+|             | acreage.      seed.   | acreage.   seed.   |   acreage.   seed.   | acreage.   seed.   |
 |             | ac. rd.     qr.bsl.pk.| ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.|   ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.| ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.|
+| Maldon      | 112.  .     30. 5.  . |  13½. .   6. 4.  . | H. 20.  .   7. 4.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+| Letherhead  |    .  .     11. 1.  . |    .  .  21. 1. 2. |      .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+| Farley      |    .  .     18. 3.  . |    .  .   5. 4.  . | S.   .  .   2. 7.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
 |             |   Frum vesc.          |                    |                      |                    |
 |             |    .  .      4. 2.  . |                    |                      |                    |
+| Elham       |   6. 1.      5. 0. 2. |    .  .    .  .  . |      .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+| Cambridge   |    .  .     11. 1.  . |    .  .    .  .  . | D.   .  .  20. 7.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+| Gamlingay   |  54½. .     15. 2. 2. |    .  .    .  .  . | D. 45.  .  22. 5.  . |  43½. .  12. 2.  . |
+| Wolford     |  59.  .     16. 2.  . |  25.  .  12.  .  . | D.  7.  .   3. 4.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+| Cheddington |    .  .       . 6.  . |    .  .    .  .  . | D.   .  .   5. 6.  . |    .  .   3. 1.  . |
+| Cuxham      |  96.  . {^a}18. 0. 2. |   3.  .   1. 2. 2. | D. 15½. .    . 8.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+| Holywell    |  14½. .      3. 4.  . |    .  .  47. 2.  . |      .  .    .  .  . |  16.  .   5. 0. 2. |
+| Basingstoke |   2½. .       . 5.  . |  15.  .   5. 5.  . | B. 46½. .  14. 4.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
++-------------+-----------------------+--------------------+----------------------+--------------------+

{^a} Sic acræ ij busselli j pecke.


--page 45  MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE.

PRODUCE. Autumn, 1336.
++--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
=|        Oats.       |        Beans.      |        Peas.       |       Vetches.     |       Mixtil.      |
++--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
+|     qr. bsl. pk.   |     qr. bsl. pk.   |      qr. bsl. pk.  |     qr. bsl. pk.   |     qr. bsl. pk.   |
+|    165.  1.  2.    |       .   .   .    |        .   .   .   |      2.   .   .    |       .   .   .    |
+|     39.  2.   .    |      1.  0.  1.    |       2.  4.  2.   |      1.  2.  1.    |       .   .   .    |
+|     88.  1.  1.    |       .  3.   .    |       1.  6.  1.   |      1.  3.  1.    |       .   .   .    |
+|    106.  5.   .    |       .   .   .    |      24.  5.   .   |     35.  3.  2.    |       .   .   .    |
+|     14.  2.  3.    |       .  7.   .    |        .   .   .   |       .   .   .    |      8.  7.  2.    |
+|       .   .   .    |       .   .   .    |      13.  1.   .   |       .   .   .    |       .   .   .    |
+|      4.  3.  3.    |     30.  5.   .    |      14.  6.   .   |       .   .   .    |       .   .   .    |
+|       .   .   .    |     14.  5.   .    |      30.  3.  2.   |       .   .   .    |     25.  6.   .    |
+|     92.  6.  3.    |       .   .   .    | White 3.   .   .   |       .   .   .    |       .   .   .    |
 |                    |                    | Grey 13.   .   .   |                    |                    |
+|       .   .   .    |       .   .   .    |        .   .   .   |       .   .   .    |       .   .   .    |
+|     10.  4.   .    |       .   .   .    |       1.   .   .   |      1.   .   .    |       .   .   .    |
++--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+

Winter and Spring, 1336-7.
++--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
+| acreage.   seed.   | acreage.   seed.   | acreage.   seed.   | acreage.   seed.   | acreage.   seed.   |
 | ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.| ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.| ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.| ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.| ac. rd.  qr.bsl.pk.|
+| 130.  .  65.  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |   2.  .    . 5.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+|    .  .  23. 7.  . |    .  .    . 5.  . |    .  .   1. 6.  . |    .  .   1. 6. 1. |    .  .    .  .  . |
+|    .  .  30. 2.  . |    .  .    . 1.  . |    .  .   1. 2.  . |    .  .   1.  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+|   6.  .   5. 2.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |   3½. .   1. 4.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+|    .  .   4. 4.  . |    .  .   1. 7.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .   1. 5. 2. |
+|    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |  21.  .   7. 7.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+|  10. 3.   5. 3.  . |  11.  .   5. 3.  . |  34.  .  11.  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+|    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .   3. 6.  . |    .  .   2. 2. 2. |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .   1. 6.  . |
+|                    |                    |       White        |                    |                    |
 |  55.  .  21. 2.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |   5.  .   1. 2.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
 |                    |                    |        Grey        |                    |                    |
 |                    |                    |  11½. .   3. 2.  . |                    |                    |
+|    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
+|  16.  .   7. 4.  . |    .  .    .  .  . |   2½. .    . 5.  . |   4.  .   1.  .  . |    .  .    .  .  . |
++--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+


--page 46  MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE.

STOCK AND PRODUCE. 1333.
++----------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
+|                | Maldon      | Letherhead  | Farley      | Elham       | Cambridge   | Gamlingay   | Cheddington | Wolford     | Cuxham      | Holywell    | Basingstoke |
++----------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
+| Horses         |      5      |      2      |      2      |      1      |      2      |      4      |      4      |      3      |      3      |      6      |      .      |
+| Stotts         |      7      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      3      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |
+| Affri          |      .      |      8      |     15      |      .      |      .      |      4      |      2      |      .      |      4      |      4      |      5      |
+| Oxen and Cows  |     42      |     24      |      4      |      .      |      8      |     27      |     22      |     15      |     28      |     24      |      8      |
+| Ewes           |     61      |     46      |     69      |      .      |      .      |      .      |    131      |     11      |     20      |      .      |      4      |
+| Muttons        |    233      |     33      |     85      |      .      |      .      |      .      |     49      |    139      |     60      |      .      |     27      |
+| Hoggasters     |     14      |      8      |     45      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |     27{^b}  |      .      |      .      |
+| Rams           |      2      |      1      |      3      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      3      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |
+| Lambs          |      8      |     18      |     14      |      .      |      .      |      .      |     46      |      1      |     13      |      .      |      .      |
+| Calves         |      6      |      6      |      4      |      .      |      2      |      2      |      .      |      .      |      7      |      2      |      2      |
+| Pigs           |     43      |     26      |     22      |      3      |      4      |      5      |      1      |     33      |     13      |      .      |      1      |
+| Porcelli       |     17      |      7      |      7      |     34      |      .      |     21      |      .      |     16      |      .      |      .      |      9      |
+| Geese          |     34      |     15      |     16      |      4      |     28      |     21      |     37      |     36      |     12      |     33      |     16      |
+| Capons         |     18      |     18      |     15      |      .      |      .      |      4      |      8      |     17      |     22      |     20      |      2      |
+| Fowls          |     38      |     22      |     31      |     49      |     28      |     28      |     15      |     23      |     58      |     20      |     12      |
+| Ducks          |     12      |     18      |     18      |     25      |      5      |      9      |      .      |      .      |     11      |     28      |      5      |
+| Wool           |    114      |     27      |     69      |      .      |      .      |      .      |     52      |     42      |     44      |      .      |      .      |
 | Clove of 7lbs. |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      3      |      .      |      .      |
+| Sheep fleecces |      .      |    163      |    424      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |     28      |
+| Lamb fleeces   |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |
++----------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

Losses.
++----------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
+| Cattle         |      1      |      4      |      2      |      .      |      .      |      2      |      1      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      1      |
+| Sheep          |    179      |     47      |     57      |      .      |      .      |      .      |     78      |     20      |     16      |      .      |     11      |
+| Poultry        |      .      |      7      |      .      |      .      |      .      |     11{^a}  |      .      |      1      |     21      |      .      |      .      |
+| Pigs           |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      9      |      .      |      6      |      .      |      .      |      .      |
++----------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

{^a} Quarum una de arbore prostrata.
{^b} Seven hoggasters, 6 jercions, 14 hoggerels.


--page 47  MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE.

STOCK AND PRODUCE. 1334.
++----------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
+|                | Maldon      | Letherhead  | Farley      | Elham       | Cambridge   | Gamlingay   | Cheddington | Wolford     | Cuxham      | Holywell    | Basingstoke |
++----------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
+| Horses         |      4{^a}  |      2      |      2      |      1      |      2      |      3      |      4      |      4      |      4      |      6      |      5      |
+| Stotts         |      6      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      3      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |
+| Affri          |      2      |      7      |     15      |      .      |      .      |      4      |      2      |      .      |      3      |      1      |      .      |
+| Oxen and Cows  |     46      |     27      |      7      |      .      |      6      |     26      |     23      |     14      |     31      |     26      |      8      |
+| Ewes           |     57      |     30      |     89      |      .      |      .      |      .      |    102      |     11      |     17      |      .      |      .      |
+| Muttons        |    178      |     34      |    100      |      .      |      .      |    116      |     66      |    123      |     26      |      .      |     16      |
+| Hoggasters     |      .      |      9      |     10      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      1      |     11{^g}  |      .      |      .      |
+| Rams           |      2      |      .      |      3      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      3      |      .      |      1      |      .      |      .      |
+| Lambs          |     41      |     18      |     36      |      .      |      .      |      .      |     62      |      3      |      3      |      .      |      .      |
+| Calves         |      4      |      6      |      2      |      .      |      .      |      2      |      .      |      .      |      2      |      .      |      .      |
+| Pigs           |     21      |     16      |      9      |      1      |      .      |      5      |     22      |     24      |     13      |      .      |     14      |
+| Porcelli       |     20      |     20      |     28      |     15      |      .      |     27      |      6      |     14      |      6      |      .      |      7      |
+| Geese          |     25      |     13      |     17      |     22      |      9      |     35      |     36      |     28      |     11      |     27      |     13      |
+| Capons         |     22      |     21      |     12      |      .      |      1      |     15      |     26      |     16      |     24      |     20      |      2      |
+| Fowls          |     23      |     30      |     34      |     25      |     22      |     31      |      7      |     47      |     38      |      7      |     10      |
+| Ducks          |      4      |     22      |     16      |      .      |      5      |     15      |      5      |      .      |      9      |     35      |      .      |
+| Wool           |    151{^b}  |     37½     |    100      |      .      |      .      |      .      |     35      | {^e}39      | {^h}54      |      .      |      5      |
 | Clove of 7lbs. |      .      |      .      |      2      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      1      |      3      |      .      |      .      |
+| Sheep fleecces |      .      |    228½     |    626      |      .      |      .      |    118      |    157      |      .      |      .      |      .      |     23      |
+| Lamb fleeces   |      .      |      .      |     44      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |
++----------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

Losses.
++----------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
+| Cattle         |      1      |      1      |      1      |      1      |      .      |      .      |      1      |      .      |      1      |      1      |      1      |
+| Sheep          |     70      |     24      |     43      |      .      |      .      |      2      |     34      |      5      |     58      |      .      |      3      |
+| Poultry        |      8{^c}  |     17      |      9      |      3      |     30      |     15{^d}  |      .      |     15      |     30      |     11      |      3      |
+| Pigs           |      5      |      .      |      6      |      2      |      6      |      4      |      .      |     13{^f}  |      1      |      .      |      1      |
++----------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

{^a} 1 yearling filly.
{^b} 2 sacks 47 clove.
{^c} Morsu wlpis.
{^d} 4 pullets per mustelam.
{^e} 19 pet: 8lb.
{^f} Morsu wlpis iij porcelli.
{^g} 6 jercions and 2 hoggerels.
{^h} 27 pet: 3 lb.


--page 48  MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE.

STOCK AND PRODUCE. 1335.
++----------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
+|                | Maldon      | Letherhead  | Farley      | Elham       | Cambridge   | Gamlingay   | Cheddington | Wolford     | Cuxham      | Holywell    | Basingstoke |
++----------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
+| Horses         |      4      |      2      |      2      |      2      |      2      |      4{^b}  |      4      |      .      |      2      |      7      |      .      |
+| Stotts         |      5      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      2      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |
+| Affri          |      .      |      4      |     15      |      .      |      .      |      4      |      1      |      3      |      4      |      2      |      4      |
+| Oxen and Cows  |     44      |     31      |     13      |      .      |      8      |     23      |     22      |     14      |     34      |     22      |      7      |
+| Ewes           |     42      |     32      |     69      |      .      |      .      |      .      |     67      |      5      |      .      |      .      |      .      |
+| Muttons        |    142      |     28      |     84      |      .      |      .      |    117      |     39      |      2      |      7      |      .      |     24      |
+| Hoggasters     |      9{^a}  |      4      |     19      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |
+| Rams           |      1      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      2      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |
+| Lambs          |     26      |     19      |     40      |      .      |      .      |      .      |     30      |     97      |      .      |      .      |      .      |
+| Calves         |      4      |      4      |      5      |      .      |      .      |      4      |      .      |      .      |      4      |      1      |      2      |
+| Pigs           |     23      |     33      |     16      |      2      |      .      |     18      |     10      |     23      |      5      |      .      |      6      |
+| Porcelli       |     25      |      6      |     12      |     22      |      .      |     23      |     36      |     16      |     12      |      .      |      9      |
+| Geese          |     30      |     14      |     20      |     24      |     28      |     47      |     35      |     25      |     13      |     28      |      .      |
+| Capons         |     24      |     12      |     12      |      .      |      5      |     20      |     18      |     12      |     25      |     16      |      .      |
+| Fowls          |     31      |     20      |     20      |     30      |     18      |     37      |     19      |     25      |     41      |      .      |     14      |
+| Ducks          |     10      |     14      |     14      |      .      |      5      |     22      |      5      |      .      |      6      |     26      |      .      |
+| Wool           |     30      |     10      |     25      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |
 | Clove of 7lbs. |      1      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |
+| Sheep fleecces |    180      |     57      |    171      |      .      |      .      |    120      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |
+| Lamb fleeces   |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |
++----------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

Losses.
++----------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
+| Cattle         |      .      |      2      |      2      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      1      |      .      |      .      |      .      |
+| Sheep          |     69      |     22      |     73      |      .      |      .      |      4      |    101      |     20      |      5      |      .      |      6      |
+| Poultry        |      7      |     13      |     14      |      .      |      .      |     12      |      .      |      6      |     25      |      .      |      5      |
+| Pigs           |      3      |      .      |     12      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      7      |     11      |      1      |      .      |      .      |
++----------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

{^a} Of whom 6 were jercions.
{^b} 1 hakeneye.


--page 49  MEDIEVAL AGRICULTURE. 

STOCK AND PRODUCE. 1336.
++----------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
+|                | Maldon      | Letherhead  | Farley      | Elham       | Cambridge   | Gamlingay   | Cheddington | Wolford     | Cuxham      | Holywell    | Basingstoke |
++----------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
+| Horses         |      3      |      2      |      2      |      1      |      1      |      2      |      4      |      2      |      3      |      5      |      .      |
+| Stotts         |      6      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |
+| Affri          |      .      |      4      |     16      |      .      |      2      |      4      |      2      |      .      |      4      |      1      |      5      |
+| Oxen and Cows  |     39      |     33      |     16      |      .      |      5      |     26      |     22      |     12      |     31      |     24      |      7      |
+| Ewes           |     48      |     83      |     69      |      .      |      .      |      .      |     67      |      4      |      .      |      .      |      .      |
+| Muttons        |    115      |     25      |     92      |      .      |      .      |    120      |     51      |      4      |    103      |      .      |     23      |
+| Hoggasters     |     26      |     46      |     34      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |    104      |      .      |      .      |      .      |
+| Rams           |      2      |      3      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |
+| Lambs          |     38      |     60      |     62      |      .      |      .      |      7      |     49      |     51      |      .      |      .      |      .      |
+| Calves         |      .      |      .      |      3      |      .      |      .      |      1      |      .      |      .      |      4      |      5      |      .      |
+| Pigs           |     23      |     29      |     34      |      2      |      .      |     23      |     34      |     45      |     12      |      .      |      1      |
+| Porcelli       |     26      |      6      |      7      |     27      |      .      |     15      |     30      |     20      |      .      |      .      |      5      |
+| Geese          |     18      |     14      |     21      |     31      |     20      |     29      |     37      |     35      |     18      |     38      |     13      |
+| Capons         |     15      |     19      |     16      |      .      |      4      |     14      |     18      |     12      |     29      |      5      |      .      |
+| Fowls          |     41      |     21      |     16      |     20      |     15      |     20      |     18      |     24      |     39      |     35      |     14      |
+| Ducks          |      5      |     11      |     16      |      .      |      3      |      4      |      3      |      .      |      .      |     24      |      .      |
+| Wool           |    156{^a}  |      .      |      3      |      .      |      .      |     36{^b}  |     30      | {^c}33      |      .      |      .      |      .      |
 | Clove of 7lbs. |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      3      |      .      |      .      |      .      |
+| Sheep fleecces |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |    115      |    109      |    112      |      .      |      .      |      .      |
+| Lamb fleeces   |      .      |      .      |     62      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |
++----------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

Losses.
++----------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
+| Cattle         |      3      |      4      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      1      |      .      |      1      |      .      |      .      |      1      |
+| Sheep          |     18      |      9      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      7      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |
+| Poultry        |      .      |      5      |      .      |      .      |      .      |     30      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      4      |
+| Pigs           |      5      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      7      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |      .      |
++----------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

{^a} 3 sacks.
{^b} 18 pet:
{^c} 18 pet: (pet: of 13 lb.)

