-- House Architecture, Vol. I
-- J. J. Stevenson
-- 1880

-- https://archive.org/details/b28127699_0001 (Wellcome Library)
--   Missing pages in PDF: 19
-- https://archive.org/details/housearchitectur01stevuoft (Univ of Toronto, Microsoft)
-- https://archive.org/details/housearchitectu01stevgoog (Oxford Univ, Google)

--page iii

HOUSE ARCHITECTURE.

BY

J. J. STEVENSON,

FELLOW OF THE ROYAL INSTITUTE OF BRITISH ARCHITECTS.


IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. I.

ARCHITECTURE.


LONDON:
MACMILLAN AND CO.
1880.


--page iv

LONDON:
PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS,
STAMFORD STREET AND CHARING CROSS.


--page v

PREFACE.

I began this book ten years ago during an interval in the
practice of my profession. Many causes have delayed its
completion, foremost among which was a sense of the
inadequacy and imperfection of what I had written. The
constant engagements of an architect made it difficult for
me to give to the book the time needed to make it satis-
factory. At the same time I was unwilling to lose the
labour and the cost already expended. A consequence of
the time the writing of the book has occupied is that many
of the views it advocates, which were unusual when they
were written, are now current and fashionable. I believe
that the book may still be useful. Though inadequate, it
is not, I hope, misleading. Throughout it, while stating
my own opinions, I have tried to give the reader data for
judging for himself.

The illustrations have been one cause of the delay in
publishing. They are all from wood blocks, which give
more satisfactory results than some modern processes, not
being liable to the imperfect printing of the lines in parts
which is apt to occur in these. Most of the illustrations
have been drawn on the wood by Mr. H. W. Brewer, some
from my own sketches, but the greater part from his. The
illustration of the Colosseum at Rome was drawn on the
wood for me by Mr. Mac Whirter, A.R.A.

The drawings have been cut on the wood by several
engravers, including Mr. Cooper, Mr. Walmsley, Mr.
Morison, Miss MacLaren, and Mr. Pitt, Miss Bateman, and


--page vi

some others on the staff of the ‘Graphic,’ to all of whom I
feel under obligation for the careful way in which the cuts
have been executed. I venture to think that some of them
deserve a high place among modern examples of the art of
wood engraving.

I am indebted for the use of a number of the cuts to the
kindness of the Proprietors of the ‘Graphic’ to Mr. George
Godwin of the ‘Builder’ and to Mr. James Parker of Oxford
for those from his father’s work on ‘English Domestic
Architecture in the Middle Ages’ and the examples of the
Orders from Rickman’s ‘Gothic Architecture.’ In two
or three cases where the same cut illustrates different
parts of the text, I have repeated it to save the reader the
trouble of looking it up in a different part of the book.

The Red House, Bayswater Hill,
December, 1879.


--page vii

CONTENTS OF VOL. I.

CHAPTER I.
Introductory .. 1

CHAPTER II.
What Constitutes Good Architecture .. 25

CHAPTER III.
The Conditions necessary for producing Good Architecture .. 70

CHAPTER IV.
What Style of Architecture is most suitable for our Houses? .. 119

CHAPTER V.
Gothic Architecture .. 123

CHAPTER VI.
Greek Architecture .. 185

CHAPTER VII.
Classical or Renaissance Architecture .. 199

CHAPTER VIII.
The Renaissance in Florence and Sienna .. 217


--page viii

CHAPTER IX.
The Renaissance in Rome .. 222

CHAPTER X.
Venetian Renaissance .. 225

CHAPTER XI.
The Renaissance in France .. 238

CHAPTER XII.
The Renaissance in Germany and the Low Countries .. 258

CHAPTER XIII.
The Renaissance in England .. 284

CHAPTER XIV.
The Renaissance in Scotland .. 350

CHAPTER XV.
Conclusion .. 380


--page ix

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS TO VOL. I.

Carolinen-Strass, Nuremberg .. Frontispiece.
1. Shed for ladders at Höchberg, near Wiirtzburg .. 22
2. Tilquhillie Castle, Aberdeenshire .. 28
3. Rock-hewn Architecture, Petra .. 30
4. Houses at Munster .. 36
5. 6, 7 and 8. Different modes of architectural treatment of the front of
	a House .. 38,39
9. House opposite the Cathedral at Augsburg .. 40
10. Old House in the High Street, Glasgow 41
11. House near the Town Hall, Nuremberg . . 42
12. Towers on the Walls at Nuremberg .. 45
13. Borthwick Castle .. 4G
14, 15, 16 and 17. Architectural Ornaments : fret, chevron, lines and dots .. 47
18. Wall decoration in Chapter House, Burnham Abbey .. 60
19. Egyptian Architecture.— Temple of Karnac .. 52
22. Greek Architecture.— Temple at Pæstum, Magna Grecia .. 56
21. Roman Architecture. — The Colosseum at Rome. — From a drawing by
	J. Mac Whirter, Esq., A.R.A .. 59
22. Gothic Architecture.— View in Westminster Abbey. — From a drawing
	by R. J. Johnson, Esq., F.R.I.B.A. .. 62
23. Renaissance Architecture. — Church of St. Étienne du Mont, Paris .. 66
24. Gable at Nuremberg .. 118
25, 26. Sections of round and pointed Waggon Vaults .. 128
27, 28 and 29. Round and pointed Domes, plan aud sections .. 128
30. Church roofed with pointed Waggon Vault .. 129
31. Church with Groined Vaulting .. 130
32. Plan of Vaulting, square in plan .. 131
33, 34. View and plan of Vaulting, oblong in plan in Nave, and square
	in Aisles .. 132
35. Round-headed window under pointed Vault .. 133
36. Groining without ribs .. 137


--page x

37. Bomanesque House at Boppart on the Rhine. — From the ‘Builder’ .. 144
38. Goliath House, Ratisbon .. 145
39. Gothic Street in Ratisbon .. 148
40. House of the Musicians at Rheims .. 150
41. Markenfield Hall, Yorkshire.— From Parker’s ‘English Domestic
	Architecture of the Middle Ages’ .. 151
42. Decorated Window, under level Cornice .. 152
43. Perpendicular Window, under level Cornice .. 152
44. House of Jacques Cœur at Bourges .. 154
45. Plans of Vaulting showing development .. 160
46. Vaulting of the Crossing, St. George’s Chapel, Windsor. — From the
	‘Graphic’ .. 161
47. Morton Hall, Cheshire .. 165
48. Corner Oriel at Augsburg.— From the ‘Builder’ .. 169
49. Gothic House at Boppart on the Bhine. — From the ‘Builder’ .. 176
50. The Nassauer House, Nuremberg .. 177
51. Hohenzollern .. 184
52. Grecian Doric. — Temple of Theseus, Athens. (For the use of this
	and the other illustrations of the Greek and Boman Orders from
	Hickman’s ‘Gothic Architecture,’ I am indebted to Mr. James Parker,
	of Oxford.) .. 186
53. Grecian Doric. — Temple of Apollo at Delos .. 187
54. Grecian Ionic. — Erechtheum, Athens .. 189
55. Grecian Ionic. — Temple on the Ilissus .. 189
56. The Corinthian Order.— Temple of Vesta, Tivoli .. 190
57. The Corinthian Order.— Temple of Jupiter Olympus, Athens . . 190
58. The Composite Order. — Arch of Septimius Severus, Rome .. 191
59. The Erectheum, Athens .. 194
60. Arch of Hadrian, Athens .. 204
61. The Custom House, King’s Lynn .. 206
62. The Blaek Gate, Treves .. 207
63. Roman Capital carved in brick .. 208
64. Amresbury, principal front .. 209
65. Boman Doric.— Theatre of Marcellus, Bome .. 210
66. Roman Ionic.— Aqueduct of Hadrian, Athens .. 211
67. Roman Ionic.— Temple of Fortuna Virilis, Bome .. 211
68. Nioollini Palace, Florence .. 219
69. House in Via d’Bianchi, Bome .. 223
70. Small Gothic House at Venice .. 226
71. Vandramini Palace, Venice .. 228


--page xi

72. Cornaro Palace, Venice .. 230
78. Staircase in the Ducal Palace, Venice .. 232
74. Pesaro Palace, Venice .. 234
76. Château de Thery .. 239
76. Jacques Cœur’s House at Bourges, plan of Ground-floor .. 243
77. Château d’Azy-le-Rideau, Indre-et-Loire .. 245
78. House at Orleans .. 248
79, 80. Gables at Nuremberg .. 259
81. Houses at Munster, Westphalia .. 261
82. Street in Landshut, Bavaria .. 264
83. Houses on the Pegnitz, Nuremberg .. 266
84. Oriel Window at Freiburg in Breisgan .. 267
85. Inn at Kriegshaben, near Augsburg .. 268
86. Bishop’s House, Würzburg .. 269
87. New Münsterhof Würzburg .. 272
88. House at Würzburg .. 273
89. Tower of the Rathhaus, Mannheim .. 274
90. Wooden House at Hildesheim .. 275
91. Houses in the Market Place, Brussels .. 281
92. Old House at Lucerne .. 283
93. Longleat, Wiltshire. — From an old print .. 286
94. Interior in old House in Lime Street— From the ‘Graphic’ .. 291
95. Chimney-piece in old House in Lime Street. — From the ‘Graphic’ .. 293
96. York Gate, a Landing-place on the Thames .. 299
97. 98, 99 and 100. Amresbury, plans and elevations .. 304-5
101. St. John’s College, Oxford, second quad .. 308
102. Market-Cross, Peterborough .. 312
103. Steeple of St. Magnus, London Bridge (designed by Sir Christopher
	Wren .. 318
104. Old Merchant Taylors’ School, designed by Wren, Street Front. — From
	the ‘Graphic’ .. 319
105. Merchant Taylors’ School, Playing Court.— From the ‘Graphic’ .. 320
106. School-room of Merchant Taylors’ School.— Ditto .. 321
107. Old Bedlam, Central block .. 327
108. St. Catherine’s College, Cambridge .. 329
109. Drapers’ Almhouses, Margate .. 330
110. Kew Palace .. 333
111. Cowper’s House at Olney.— From the ‘Graphic’ .. 335
112. Redington Rectory .. 337
113. Toini Hall, South Shields .. 338


--- xii

114. Custom Honso, King’s Lynn .. 339
115. Montague House — the old British Museum .. 340
116. Old Street in London .. 341
117, 118 and 119. Doorways in Essex Street, Strand .. 342-3
120. Tilquhillie Castle, Aberdeenshire .. 352
121. Courtyard of House at Linlithgow .. 353
122. Borthwick Castle .. 358
123. Old House in High Street, Glasgow .. 359
124. Newark Castle, on the Clyde .. 361
125. Scotch Castle .. 362
126. Old Glasgow University, north side of inner Court .. 363
127. Old Glasgow University, south and west sides of inner .. 366
128. Old Glasgow University, Stair to Fore Hall .. 369
129. Old Glasgow University, the Fore Hall .. 372
130. Part of House in the High Street, Edinburgh .. 374
131. Ordinary Classic House .. 376


--page 1

HOUSE ARCHITECTURE.

CHAPTER I.



INTRODUCTORY.

TO build a house for oneself is an excellent education
in architecture. By the time it is finished, and the
owner has lived in it, he feels how much better a house
he could build with the experience he has acquired, if he
had to do it over again. While the work is going on his
attention is called to questions he had never thought of
before, which are now of the greatest interest to him. He
examines the houses of his friends, and discovers features
in them which he wishes, when too late, he had introduced
in his own plans. The designs are altered and the cost
increased. His taste in architecture, and his ideas about
planning are changed by his new experience ; the building
is too far advanced to adopt the improvements, and the
house which he had hoped would be perfect, is a source of
trouble and disappointment.

He could build another house to his mind, but to go
through the experience once in a lifetime is enough for
most people.


--page 2

To have, before commencing the building of a new
house, the knowledge which the experience of building
gives in some imperfect and fragmentary way at the end of
the process, would save the owner trouble, expense, and
after-regret. To attempt to supply this is the object of
this book.

I do not imagine that any information I can give can
supersede the services of an architect. It can no more do
this than a treatise on medicine enables us to do without
a doctor. Book knowledge is useless in practice without the
tact, gained only by experience, when and how to apply it.
But architects have frequently told me that they wished
they had such a book as this which they could put
into the hands of their employers; as one of their great
difficulties is, that those for whom they are working do
not understand what is meant by the plans, and after they
are executed find out that the result is not what they
wanted. If the employer could have understood what
was proposed, and the results which were possible, mis-
understanding and disappointment would frequently have
been avoided.

I shall try to treat of all matters connected with the
building of a house, so that any one may understand them
and have grounds for forming his own opinion. This will
involve the discussion of questions interesting to numbers
who have no intention of ever building a house. It
will necessitate, as one important branch of investigation,
an account of Architecture ; some inquiry as to its meaning
and aims, the principles on which its rules are founded,
and its uses. To attempt to discuss these questions would
be useless without some brief statement of the effects which
Architecture has aimed at, and has succeeded in producing
in various countries.

We must inquire into the conditions, social and intellec-
tual, under which Architecture produced its triumphs, and


--page 3

whether we may hope for satisfactory results, under the
conditions under which we work at the present time.

A question which must be settled before commencing a
house, is the style of architecture it is to be built in. Till
about fifty years ago, this question did not arise ; there was
only one style in which people could build, that prevalent
at the time. Since the modern Gothic revival, architects
and all who care for Architecture have been divided as to
whether we should adopt Gothic for our houses, or the
Classic style, which before that revival had been universally
used. Possibly neither of them may be quite suitable for
us. The question cannot be satisfactorily decided without
examining all the styles which we might reasonably employ
with a view to our modern wants and necessities.

Apart from its practical use, such a discussion is interest-
ing, on its own account, to all who care for Architecture ;
and even those who think the subject technical and dull
may find that it is of genuine human interest. The old
styles of Architecture were the natural outcome of the
character and history of the nations who invented them,
and are among the most reliable and interesting records of
their social condition and modes of thought. Each of them
was formed by a gradual process of development, which it is
most interesting to trace. Architecture has of late years
become a subject of interest, and every one feels he should
know something of it. Truer and more practical knowledge
of it, more widely diffused, might give us again houses
characterised by good taste and beauty, like those of former
times, in place of the dulness and vulgar pretentiousness
which disfigure our streets and landscapes.


The second volume treats of the planning and arrange-
ment of houses, building materials, and the conveniences
and mechanical contrivances which our modern notions of
comfort demand. To get a perfectly satisfactory plan is of


--page 4

all matters the most important in building a house. House-
planning is an art derived through long tradition, and,
to understand it, we must trace its history, which is full
of interest, for it is the history of home life and social
habits.

To plan rightly we must know what experience has
shown to be requisite in modern house-planning.

Before we can combine the various rooms and offices
together into one house, we must understand the purpose
of each, and the best form and size for that purpose. The
family living-rooms, the servants’ offices, and the passages
and stairs connecting them, will each form the subject of a
chapter, before treating of the best ways of arranging and
combining these together.

There is a short chapter on the number of stories and
height of houses in different circumstances, and another on
the usual plan of town houses.

To attempt a technical treatise on building materials
and construction would be impossible in our space, and
useless for our purpose ; but some information is necessary
on the kind of materials we can have at our command,
and the right way of using them, so as to produce a good
architectural effect in form and colour.

When the house is built it must be warmed and
ventilated, supplied with water, a system of drainage, and
various mechanical contrivances, such as bells, speak-
ing tubes, and lifts, for convenience or to save servants’
labour. These matters will form the subject of a chapter.

As a house is not complete internally without decoration
and furniture, nor externally, without its surrounding
terraces, gardens and pleasure grounds, a complete treatise
on house architecture ought to include chapters on these
subjects. They were in part written, but the preparation
of proper illustrations would have still farther postponed
this publication, already too long delayed.


--page 5

These questions will be better discussed with reference
to a house in the country, where there is some space and
freedom of arrangement, than if we are bound by the
stereotyped arrangements of town houses.

Every one of them has of late years been a subject of
interest and discussion ; and information is to be got with
regard to all of them in magazine articles, and in books
large and small. The literature of the subject is too
extensive for easy acquirement or handy reference, and to
be of practical use to any one building a house, it requires
to be digested, and the conflicting views which abound
on every point stated and compared. For any one without
practical experience of building operations this process
would be difficult, and the results probably wrong. Some
notice of the more important works on these subjects will
indicate the gap which this book is intended to fill.

Mr. Ruskin, in his ‘Seven Lamps of Architecture,’ and
in his ‘Stones of Venice,’ has discussed with eloquence
and insight the fundamental principles of Architecture, the
value of the art to us, and the style we ought to adopt for
modern use. By these and other writings he has inspired
his generation with enthusiasm for art, and for nobleness
and beauty in architecture. I do not know how far he
holds to the views expressed in these works, as since their
publication he has modified some of his opinions. In them
the subject is treated too often from the point of view of
Italy to be practically useful or true of England. I think
some of his views on architecture are open to question, and
that their practical influence on modern architecture has to
some extent been mischievous.


Mr. Fergusson, in his ‘History of Architecture,’ gives a
clear and interesting account of all the great styles of
architecture which have existed in the world. His
three volumes form a complete text-book of great


--page 6

value. He describes the historical buildings of each style,
especially those which are landmarks in the history of
art, and criticises them with ability and knowledge, and
with the confidence which springs from the consciousness
of their possession; pointing out faults, and suggesting
how the architect should have made his design so as to
avoid them.

I do not think he is always successful, but the task he
sets himself is difficult. We do not require a critic when
he finds fault with a poem to put it right by composing
passages to replace those he objects to.

It is, perhaps, a task beyond human ability to re-design
the great buildings of the different styles of architecture,
for it implies greater insight and architectural invention
than their architects possessed. Trying to work out in
several instances the results of Mr. Fergusson’s proposed
improvements on historical buildings, I have found either
that they altered the intention of the design, or introduced
some new difficulty which it is not unreasonable to
suppose the designer had appreciated and avoided. In
criticism it is at least safer, and perhaps more instructive,
instead of suggesting alterations, to take the buildings as
they are, and try to realise their meaning and the impres-
sion they were intended to produce.

Throughout the work, Mr. Fergusson contrasts the con-
ditions under which these old styles grew up with our
modern method of producing architecture, which he insists
we must abandon and return to the old, if the art is to
flourish. This question is of interest to all who care for
architecture, and especially to architects, as it involves their
existence.


About twenty years ago. Sir Gilbert Scott published a
little book on ‘Secular and Domestic Architecture, Present
and Future,’ to show how suitable the Gothic style of


--page 7

architecture is for our houses and public buildings. Since
then the principles he advocated have largely influenced
our architecture, and have been adopted even by our
ordinary builders, but the result has not been all that could
be wished.

Difficulties not anticipated have shown themselves in
adapting the style to modern use, and there is a feeling that
the question whether Gothic is the most suitable style of
architecture for modern domestic use needs reconsideration.

Since Sir Gilbert Scott’s lamented death his lectures
to the students of the Royal Academy, which he had
previously prepared for publication, have been published in
two volumes full of admirable illustrations of English
mediæval ecclesiastical architecture. The lectures, which
were delivered at intervals during fourteen years, are not
a consecutive treatise. They give the results of the author’s
life-long enthusiastic study of mediaeval church architecture,
especially in England. His knowledge of buildings, from
cathedrals to village churches, was unsurpassed, and it is
used in discussing the interesting questions of the develop-
ment and principles of Gothic architecture. These form
a small part of the subject of this book, which would
be incomplete without a reference to Sir Gilbert Scott’s
views.

In his pleasant book, ‘Hints on Household Taste,’
Mr. Eastlake expresses his conviction that the “Gothic
Renaissance” is a reformation slowly but surely taking
place in this country, and urges the adoption of Gothic for
our houses and for our furniture, even in ordinary Classic
houses. His own designs in the book for decoration and
furniture are in the Gothic style, but in the illustrations
from old work, he shows an incipient liking for the more
picturesque forms of the Classic style, which, I have reason
to believe time has not diminished.


--page 8

For the history of domestic architecture in England in
the Middle Ages, the work commenced by Mr. Hudson
Turner, and continued by Mr. Parker, is exhaustive. I
have availed myself largely of it in giving the history of
house-planning, and by Mr. J. Parker’s kindness I have
been allowed the use of several of the woodcuts for these
volumes.

There are three systems of arrangement of the matter of
the book — by subjects, by centuries, and by counties, so that
parts of the same subject turn up at wide intervals — it is
difficult to remember where. It is really a collection of
valuable notes of interesting facts of mediaeval life in all
its phases, and a copious index gets over the difficulty of
arrangement.


On the subject of the planning of houses, ‘The English
Gentleman’s House’ by Professor Kerr, contains about all
that need be known. The book is large and would bear
condensation. In the chapters on planning I have endea-
voured to go over the same ground. I shall have occasion
sometimes to refer to it, as I cannot always agree with
the statements and recommendations contained in it. Mr.
Kerr devotes a small portion of it to the subject of archi-
tectural style. He suggests as the answer of the English
gentleman, when his architect asks him in what style he
wishes his house built? "In no style at all, except the
comfortable style if there be one," and, "Take me as I
am, and build my house in my own style." He gives,
however, as samples for the gentleman to choose from, the
same plan done up in ten different styles — Elizabethan,
and revived Elizabethan, Palladian, rural Italian, Palatial
Italian, and French Italian, the English Renaissance style,
the Mediaeval or Gothic style, the Cottage style, and the
Scotch Baronial style.

The feat is a difficult one; something like translating


--page 9

a piece of poetry into ten different languages. Mr. Kerr’s
designs fail in giving the nicer characteristics of the
various styles, but this would have been too much to
expect from one author. They have all a family likeness,
due no doubt to their common parentage. They remind
me of a fish dinner at which, cod, skate, and haddock
all tasted the same, having been all cooked with the same
lard.


Sir Edmund Beckett has given the public the benefit of
some of his extensive experience as a builder and amateur
architect, in a little book which he calls, ‘A Book on Build-
ing,’ in which his aim is to give practical information to
those intending to build, how to avoid legal and structural
mistakes. The subject of house-building occupies a con-
siderable part of it, not treated in a systematic way, but by
instances of the mistakes which, in his experience, builders
and architects are liable to commit. The book does not
profess to be a systematic treatise, and assumes the necessity
of architects. The arrangement is somewhat heteroge-
neous ; such diverse subjects as kitchen grates, skylights,
oak graining (which the author approves of), and windows
all being treated of together. It goes into minute detail on
some points, but I doubt if the information and directions
are sufficient to enable an employer, who had not the
practical experience of the author, to keep from error an
architect who did not know his business. It leaves a
strong impression of the risk which any one runs in build-
ing, unless he superintends his architect not only in making
the plans, but in carrying out the work.

The first chapter treats of agreements with architects and
builders, giving model forms of contract, to prevent the
employer surrendering his authority over the work, and
controverts the doctrine which, it seems, is held by some
architects that, "after the plans are settled and the work


--page 10

commenced, the ‘client’ must yield himself absolutely to his
professional adviser." It is reasonable rather that as he
pays his money he should have his choice. Employers
may sometimes insist on things in a building which an
architect could not carry out consistently with his own
credit. But it is seldom that the employer’s wishes,
though they may not be what the architect thinks best,
cannot be worked into the design.

One plan of a house is given, which Sir Edmund Beckett
designed for himself. It has a central hall lighted from
the ceiling and contains many of the usual modern arrange-
ments, but the want of facility in getting over difficulties,
not uncommon in the work of amateurs, may be detected
in parts, and a single instance is in any case insufficient
to give an adequate idea of house-planning.

The views expressed by the author are always decided,
and many of them are the same as my own experience had
led me to form. In judging of the architectural merit of
buildings he takes, as we must all do, his own taste as
the standard, with too little appreciation, perhaps, of the
possibility of a different opinion in others.

The book also contains chapters on the theory of domes
and on the great pyramid.


The late M. Viollet-le-Duc, the author of the admirable
‘Dictionary of French Mediæval Architecture,’ recently pub-
lished a charming little book, which has been translated into
English, under the title of ‘How to Build a House.’ The
title is somewhat deceptive; the French title, ‘L’Histoire
d’une Maison,’ describes the contents more accurately.

It would not help any one in building an English house.
The conditions of building are those of French country parts,
where the materials and modes of work differ from ours in
England. The plan is eminently French; no isolation of


--page 11

the public rooms, but all opening one into another, the
bedrooms sufficient only for the limited size of French
families; the whole nursery accommodation in a house
which costs £6000 being a small bedroom over the kitchen.

The book, in plan a novelette, is a pleasantly told lesson
on the principles of common-sense architecture. A lad, idle
at home during the German war, is set, under the guidance
of his cousin, an architect, to build a house as a surprise for
his sister on her return from her marriage jaunt. Knowing
architecture only from the treatises on the five orders
in his father’s library, he had thought it a dreary subject,
but his interest is awakened by being taught by practical
experience how every feature of architecture springs from
use and convenience. It is not shown, however, how
pointed arches, and some other features introduced into the
design of the house, spring from any necessity of construc-
tion or use. The book is an excellent one for creating an
interest in the subject.

The same author had recently published another book
also translated into English, under the title of ‘The Habi-
tations of Man in All Ages,’ also in form a novelette. Two
"beings" with an interest in house building visit, after the
manner of the Wandering Jew, the various countries of the
world, beginning with the times of the cave men, and
taking leave of us at a dinner at a Paris restaurant in the
days of the Second Empire. One of the companions is con-
servative, the other in favour of the successive improve-
ments in the construction of dwellings which they come
across in their large experience. Both are rather bores,
while the descriptions and pictures of the houses they see
are, like the celebrated treatise of the author’s countryman
on the camel, drawn largely from his own imagination.
The addition of the data, if any, on which they are founded,
would have made the book of more value. It does not
profess to treat of modern houses.


--page 12

M. Viollet-le-Duc’s ‘Dictionary of Gothic Architecture’ is
well known in this country, where the greater favour for
this style has made it more popular than in France.

It is a complete encyclopædia of French mediæval archi-
tecture, containing admirable treatises on its principles and
history, and on the arts connected with it; every detail
being explained and illustrated with a wealth of knowledge,
which seems to include every example of the style. I have
been largely indebted to it for a knowledge of Gothic archi-
tecture in its history, its principles, and its forms. The
illustrations are very clever, well drawn and well cut on the
wood. In their style, clean and sharp and rather thin, they
suggest modern Gothic, and they somehow impart an air
of modern Gothic to all the buildings, even the Classic ones,
which they illustrate. The pointing of the stones is always
carefully shown, which gives an air of surface and reality to
the drawings.

It is possibly on account of its success in the drawings
that M. Viollet-le-Duc has occasionally in his restorations
applied the same process to the buildings themselves, by
filling in the joints of the stones with black mortar, making
the interior a net-work of black lines. This is not what the
old builders intended. In the desire to show the construc-
tion the architecture is lost. M. Viollet-le-Duc was more
successful as an author than as an architect.


Information on all the subjects I purpose to treat can be
found in the Cyclopaedias and Dictionaries of Architecture,
such as Gwilt’s ‘Encyclopædia,’ or Raynaud’s ‘Traite d’ Archi-
tecture,’ Paris 1863. The former, even in its later editions,
is somewhat out of date in its information and its views.
The short chapter on house-planning takes as a standard
houses about a century old — in its criticism of buildings it
judges of their merits according to their Classic purity.

Raynaud’s book is more modern and thorough, but it is


--page 13

based on French practice, and is an unsafe guide for English
methods of work. Such books are of more use as books
of reference to the profession than for teaching beginners,
for which purpose an alphabetical arrangement is un-
satisfactory.

On the important subjects of draining, ventilation,
heating, &amp;c., many treatises have lately been published,
advocating different systems, and inventions are constantly
advertised, which it would be tedious to enumerate. I have
attempted to explain the principles of systems which have
proved successful in practice.

There is justification, I think, for a book which aims to
collect together all that need be said on these subjects, for
ordinary practical purposes. On each of them books have
been written, but what is essential to be known may, I
think, be given within a few chapters.

As I do not presume to teach the profession, but only the
unlearned, I shall try to avoid technical terms, taking
nothing for granted, but deducing everything from common
first principles.

In former days, when the old styles of architecture
flourished, there was no occasion for such investigation of
the principles and practice of these arts, for each age had
only one way of working in them ; all others being either
inconceivable or false. The only difference consisted in
doing better or worse the same things in the same way ;
and the changes of style were so gradual, like those of
natural growth, that though obvious when measured over
centuries, they were unnoticed as they occurred.

We have cut ourselves loose from tradition. Instead of
accepting and trustfully following the ways and customs
handed down to us, we claim to be absolute judges of right,
and make our individual preferences laws. It would need


--page 14

omniscience not to fail. It may be some explanation of
this state of matters with regard to architecture, that since
the Middle Ages closed, the same uncertainty has prevailed
in other matters. In religion, philosophy, politics, even
in morals, as well as in architecture, it seems as if the
grounds of our faith had to be settled anew. We cannot,
as of old, trust the experts, for they are not themselves
agreed. The thread of tradition has been cut, and in these,
as in architecture, there are now no authoritative standards
or articles of faith to which appeal can be made, and
judgment given.

Some may be content in building to accept at hap-
hazard the first advice that turns up ; but to form rational
decisions, and to have an intelligent interest in the work, a
man must understand the principles of the arts which find a
place in it, especially of architecture in its double purpose
of ministering to convenience and beauty. He must know
its aims, and wherein its goodness consists — the causes of
present failure, and the conditions necessary for success —
and something of the nature and merits of different styles,
if he has to decide which is best to choose.

Till the public care more for it, and know more about it,
we cannot look for much improvement. Why should they
spend money, and put themselves to trouble for mere dis-
play or to gratify whims of architects, which they neither
appreciate nor understand ? Better take the builder’s house
with its compo-dressings and vulgar ornament. It is
sensibly planned and seems cheap at the money. But it
has been built to sell. The principle of construction seems
to be that it shall be always out of repair, so as to
provide constant work for the building trades; and that
at the end of the lease it may be worthless to the ground
landlord.

The walls are thin and let in the cold and the sound even
of conversation from the next house. But for the floor


--page 15

timbers which tie them together, a gust of wind would
overturn them ; the floors shake with the slightest move-
ment; the plaster is half sand, and is kept on the walls
mainly by the paper pasted on it ; doors and windows do
not fit; the plumber work is bad; the smell and poison
of the drains come in, and the water-pipes freeze ; the
"compo" outside, imitating massive stonework, requires
constant painting, and occasionally scales off in masses.
Its existence is a constant process of going to pieces ; work-
men are never out of it, and the tenant finds that to keep
it habitable adds a third to his rent. The architecture,
however small the house may be, is a union of vulgar
pretentiousness and mean shams.

The houses which men build for themselves need not
have these faults of bad workmanship, but they are some-
times ill planned and often ugly. The owner may have had
every desire to make his house a charming residence, and
have spent money ungrudgingly, but too often his hopes are
not fulfilled. It is not perfect as he intended. If he had to
do it over again, he would make it different. He finds,
perhaps, that he has miscalculated his requirements, and the
destination of the rooms has to be changed, destroying the
cherished arrangements of the plan ; or in his desire for
light and view, he has made his drawing-room all window —
scorching in summer, cold in winter, and without wall space
for the furniture ; or possibly, notwithstanding every care,
the damp comes through the walls, some of the chimneys
smoke, or the water-pipes freeze. Frequently he finds that
while it was being built his taste has changed. With better
knowledge, from the attention he has given to the matter
since he became practically interested in building, he now
sees how much better his house might have been ; that what
he thought would be beautiful and grand is fantastic, or
vulgar and pretentious ; or, if he does not see it, it may be
none the less true. From whatever cause it arises, it is


--page 16

generally admitted that a large proportion of modern houses
are architectural failures.

The art in them, such as it is, usually stops at the outside.
Here they may have some resemblance to a mediaeval castle
or an Italian palace, but we know that on entering we shall
find neither the bold stone carving — the construction every-
where apparent — the tapestry, and stained glass of the one,
nor the marbles and frescoes of the other. Whether Classic
or Gothic, the lobby will be painted in imitation of marble
or granite ; the dining-room with a plain tint of light
green, and a whitewashed ceiling ; the drawing-room paper
of the last fashionable pattern ; the bedrooms as common-
place as those of an hotel ; the carpets attempting to look
an uneven surface of holes we would stumble in, and
bunches of flowers we would crush in walking over ; the
furniture a mass of unmeaning curves ; the pictures mere
furniture, and no part of the architecture. In both there
are the same gigantic mirrors, and great plate-glass
windows with muslin curtains, occasionally, perhaps, a
few old buffets or carved chairs from Wardour Street —
reminiscences of the time when the same art and style
governed not only the outside architecture of the house, but
its internal decorations and everything it contained.

In old times it was not so. A man was certain in
building to get his money’s worth in art. Every old house
is interesting, not because it is old, but because it is good.
The style of one age may be better than another, but all are
good in their way. The houses of Pompeii were all works
of art; so are the few remains of Romanesque domestic
architecture, at Cluny and elsewhere. Old Gothic houses
of every period of the style are beautiful. Our streets are
not to be compared in beauty with those of Venice, even in
their decay, with all their colour gone, or in picturesqueness
with those of Nuremberg (frontispiece), which was no better
than many another city of its day, but has had the good


--page 17

fortune to have been preserved till now from modern altera-
tions. For the charm of homeliness nothing can surpass
the houses of the Tudor age, with their mullioned windows
and oak-carving ; and we can only feebly imitate the
sumptuousness and elegance of those of the Renaissance of
Francis I., or of our own Jacobean. Some may be better
than others, but there are no failures such as we now
constantly see produced. All are good architecture of their
kind, not great mansions only, but farmhouses and cottages
in village streets. And these results were accomplished, not
by a specially educated profession, like the architects of the
present day, directing the tradesmen by means of drawings
and instructions, but by common tradesmen themselves,
without any superintendence. Every village mason could
build houses and churches such as for excellence and
accuracy in architectural style we vainly now, with all our
knowledge, attempt to imitate. Every village carpenter
could make furniture more beautiful and in truer taste
than the best town-made nowadays — solid in construction,
graceful in line, and rich in carving.

As for house-painting, we have ceased, justly enough,
perhaps, to consider it an art. We do not look on those
painters as artists who work on the walls of our rooms.
Every London builder thinks himself competent to design
and execute decoration. Some call themselves plumbers
and decorators, and one large London upholstering firm
advertises that it includes decoration in its house agency
department. Cheesemonger and decorator would be about
as congruous. We prefer to give artistic work to "prac-
tical men," as they are called, that is, to those who know
nothing about the subject.

In old time people thought great artists were the proper
men to do the work — Michael Angelo and Raphael were
proud to be wall-decorators. If our houses are to be works
of art, they must possess not only outside beauty, architec-


--page 18

tural proportions, and good colour, the artistic expression
of their purpose and of modern life, not of uses and habits
long extinct, but they must have the same qualities, the
same art, inside, in all their decorations and furnishing.
We copy only one part, and that the least important in
the general effect of former systems of architecture — the
stone mouldings and ornaments which time happens to have
left to us — omitting the decoration, and making the furniture
discordant, because in the buildings we copy from the one
happens to have perished and the other to be removed.

To be really a high work of art, a house must not only
be beautiful outside, and all its surroundings in harmony,
but inside there must be not only no shams and meannesses,
but good art throughout ; the walls and ceilings rich in
colour and in art expression ; paintings as good as art
can make them, their decoration — a part of them — not
hung on them by strings ; the sculpture only the decora-
tion of the architecture, the crowning points of its ornament
or the enrichment of its surface, and in thus aiding it,
acquiring an interest it never has when thinking only
of itself; the furniture good in construction, graceful in
its lines, and in harmony with the architecture ; all the
resources of art and manufacture, carpets, rich hangings,
stained glass, gilding, carving, painting, good as art, and
ministering to one harmonious effect.

The thing has been. The houses of Pompeii were
second-rate performances in their age, but for wealth of art
throughout them, and unity of design down to the smallest
details, our richest mansions cannot compare with them.

A few battered buildings pulled about and altered, their
furniture removed long since, when their old owners left
them, a scrap of colour here and there on the walls, telling
that they once glowed with it, are all that remains to us of
the houses of the Middle Ages.

But in their churches we can still trace the evidence of


--page 19

what architecture then meant. Their windows here and
there, as at York, or Bourges, or Chartres, still show us a
splendour of colour in their stained glass which, but for
them, we should never have dreamt of; the marble pillars
remain ; in places the floor, after the treading of forty
generations, still glows with rich patterns of coloured tiles,
and, under accumulated coats of whitewash, every now and
then we discover traces of the painting which once covered
their walls, was concentrated in brightness on the tombs
and altars, and culminated on the ceiling; great crowns
suspended from the roofs, studded with jewels and sparkling
with lights ; vestments, hangings, and furniture, admirable
in colour and design, all uniting in producing an effect of
rich, glowing splendour, of which these churches now are
but the grey, white skeletons. The tiled floors and stained
glass remain, for the colour in them was in imperishable
material; but they are only isolated scraps of a system of
decoration which pervaded the whole building. Floors
and windows are the last parts of a room we should think
of colouring. The object in using encaustic tiles and
stained glass was merely to carry out over windows and
floors the colouring of the other parts of the building; and
we think we are reviving mediaeval art when we copy these
only, and leave the walls and ceiling cold stone, or raw,
grey plaster.

It is of some interest to investigate the reasons why art
in our houses is so hopeless and helpless, so often mere
failure, and its greatest successes only bad imitations of the
art which nations and periods inferior to us in wealth and
resources produced constantly and naturally, and without
apparent effort.

It may be that the present degraded state of house-build-
ing is inevitable ; that we must submit to see the country
covered with miles of dismal, uninteresting streets, and
spotted over with villas which violate good taste and


--page 20

destroy its beauty, and be content with houses which make
our lives in them a succession of annoyances; but if a
remedy is to be found, the first step must be to know the
causes which have produced our failure.

There are indications of a prevalent desire for a better
state of things ; and a knowledge of the objects to be aimed
at, and the results attainable, in convenience and beauty, in
a house and its belongings, may prevent a waste of effort
in wrong directions, along paths by which advancement is
impossible — may give higher and truer aims to those who
are building for themselves, and, in time, might even
improve the houses built on speculation by diffusing better
taste, and creating a preference for houses sounder in con-
struction and less vulgar in style.

It is not because we are too poor that our buildings now
cannot attempt to rival, in completeness and splendour of
art, those of Greece or Rome, or of the Middle Ages.
Nor is it even from our unwillingness to spend money.
I suppose no age ever supported a greater number of
artists, not in comfort merely, but in wealth. I certainly
do not grudge it them, for none know better how to spend
it. Besides those artists whom we know, who furnish the
walls of the principal exhibitions, there is an innumerable
company whose names we never hear, who turn out moon-
lights, or mills, or mountain scenery with the regularity of
manufacture, and somehow find a continuous sale. There
are miles on miles of new pictures exhibited each year,
which must get sold somehow, or the supply would cease.
Sculpture, perhaps, is more a drug in the market; though
the number of British Philistines and others who each
year have their features immortalised in imperishable
marble is considerable — much greater than those we see
ranged close in rows like gallipots on shelves in exhibitions.
And of expenditure on architecture there is certainly no
stint. Old churches are pulled down for the mere pleasure


--page 21

of building new ones (more’s the pity) ; new town halls,
law courts, country houses, town mansions, clubs, churches,
colleges, are rising everywhere — in many cases the building
motive being the desire of increased magnificence, and the
pleasure of building, rather than the necessity ; and to this
expenditure I object, of course, still less than to that on
easel pictures. But are the results satisfactory ? are the
churches as good as old ones ? Do the mansions in town
or country approach in beauty, in completeness of art,
those of the times of the Tudors or Stuarts ? Does the
result in the club-houses justify the money spent on
them ? It is not sufficient answer to point to one or two
perfect houses or churches among the thousands built. In
the old times there were none bad. They may not show
originality, or genius, or cleverness; but from palace to
cottage they are natural and harmonious throughout, and
yet they were no doubt built by common builders, for
architects were not thought of, except for the most important
works.

There was a sense of art in the people, which did not need
grand buildings or great expenditure for its manifestation,
but showed itself in the cheapest and commonest structures.
Here is a mere shed for holding ladders at a small German
village (fig. 1, next page), which shows the old instinct,
which we seem to have lost, to make the commonest things
interesting and pleasing.

Nowadays, except in rare and special instances, our
buildings are bad and inartistic. And these special buildings
are all imitations, more or less perfect, of old work.

It is of little use asking who is to blame. The most
obvious answer is, that it is the architects themselves, and
the most obvious remedy, to hang a few of them ; but the
answer, though simple, is only half true, and the remedy,
though severe, would be inadequate. The evil is not so
much ignorance of architecture on the part either of its


--page 22

professors or the public, for every one with any pretensions
to taste knows something about it, has read Ruskin, and
considers himself (or herself) a judge ; and never in the
world’s history were there so many styles understood and
practised, more or less correctly. It may be that we know
too much about architectural styles — that the variety of our
knowledge confuses us, and prevents us doing what would
be natural — that our restlessness prevents us sticking to
any one of them till we have perfected it, and made it our
own. Or our wealth, instead of helping us, may be the

--figure 1. Shed for ladders at Hochberg, near Würzburg.

cause of our failure. We may be so devoted to its acquisi-
tion that we have no time left to learn how to spend
it; for money alone can no more give us art than it
can give us learning. Or we may not really care for art —
paying for it, not that we like it, but because we think
our position in society requires a certain amount of dis-
play, which bad art will satisfy as well as good. Or the
character of our buildings, as in all architectural styles,
may merely express the character of the people who
produce them; the display of magnificence in coarse


--page 23

form and cheap material be the natural outcome of our
vulgarity; the attempts to make things look, not what
they are, but like something else which is thought
grander — as a row of little houses clubbing together
with the help of stucco ornaments so as to look like
a palace, or a dwelling-house with a quarter of an acre
of ground from which the owner goes up to business
every morning, and where the newspaper is delivered
before breakfast, frowning with battlements, and making
believe as if it held the country round in serfdom — may
be the reflex of our pretentiousness and falsity, and signs
that in our hearts we are ashamed of ourselves.

No doubt all this is partly true, but not, I believe, to the
extent which the universality almost of such qualities in
the architecture would indicate ; for I think it can be
shown that the conditions under which architecture works
at present in this country give a facility and amount of
expresssion to such qualities altogether disproportionate to
their prevalence among the people.

The subject has really a greater than mere dilettante
interest. Though we may not be conscious of it, it is no
slight evil that the houses in which the greatest portion of
the people live are built independently of art at all, or in
defiance of it. Within the last twenty or thirty years
whole towns have come into existence, which exhibit what
seems a new characteristic in the human race — namely,
utter disregard to the beauty of their dwellings. Never,
so far as I know, have there been collections of human
habitations so dismal, so completely without one artistic
quality, or consequently so inhuman, as the miles on miles
of uniform streets in our new manufacturing towns. The
hut of the savage is at least picturesque ; for love for the
beautiful — a desire to ornament and turn into objects of art
the things they use — has hitherto been a characteristic of
all men, even the most degraded.


--page 24

If a town is old, however poor, it is sure to have some
beauty or interest; if new, we look for neither, but get out
of it as soon as we can.

Those who live among this ugliness possibly feel it no
hardship. If so, it only means that it has entered their
souls, and that they are losing one of the characteristics of
humanity ; and it is a question, whether the intense rest-
lessness of modern life is not aggravated by the places we
live in, even where art is attempted, being so devoid of any
beauty which can give lasting satisfaction.


--page 25

CHAPTER II.

WHAT CONSTITUTES GOOD ARCHITECTURE?


THIS question has of late years, in this country, been
obscured and rendered almost impossible of answer
by the rivalry of competing styles. One party would
almost say that good Architecture is Gothic architecture,
the other that it is Classic. But some specimens so bad in
both styles have been perpetrated, that even their own
friends cannot acknowledge them.

Not only may architecture be good or bad in any style,
but it is essentially the same qualities that render it so in
every style.

Architecture is simply the useful art of building elevated
to a fine art, following the tendency which all human beings
have to make articles of use beautiful as well. Out of the
same instinct, in all ages, the necessity of clothing has de-
veloped the art of dress. On the oldest pottery there is
ornament, and carvings on bone utensils have been found
coeval with the elk and the reindeer in France. No
amount of decoration was thought too great in any tribe for


--page 26

their weapons, axes, clubs, and swords : what was always
beside them they wished to be beautiful ; and when they
became settled, they ornamented their houses from the
same motive. But they also built houses for their gods;
and Architecture, with religion as a motive-power, has had
a higher and more poetic development than it could have
had in merely ministering to human wants.

As the art to begin with is a useful one, that a building
should be good architecturally, the first condition is that it
should serve its purpose — houses must be suited to the wants
and habits of their inhabitants ; castles must be strong ;
churches and temples adapted to the worship or the rites
celebrated in them.

Again, as it is a structural art, consisting in putting
materials together for a certain purpose, the second essential
of good architecture is good construction — disposing the
materials in the best form for strength and stability.

Thus far we have merely good building ; to become archi-
tecture, which is a fine art, the element of beauty or of
artistic expression must be added. From the first dawn
of civilisation all building was architectural. It has been
reserved for our age to find out that beauty in our dwell-
ings is not worth striving for, that material wants are all
that need be attended to.

Various means have been used for arranging and treating
buildings so as to add to them the element of art, and so
make them architectural. Some nations covered them with
ornament wherever they could put it. But, though this
practice is not without advocates and examples in our day,
it is unthinking and savage art.

An illustration in Mr. Owen Jones’s ‘Grammar of Orna-
ment,’ of the tattooed face of a New Zealander, shows how
hideous may be the results, even of ornament in itself
beautiful, when used in the wrong place ; and the same effect
would be produced in architecture, though not perhaps so


--page 27

strikingly, if a Doric column were covered with ornament
instead of the flutings which mark its purpose.

Architecture, to attain its highest development, must have
something more than mere ornament — the intellectual
qualities of proportion and expression. This is true of all
arts : music is proportion in sounds ; painting is proportion
in colour and forms ; and architecture, proportion of masses,
of solids and voids. But to constitute true art there must
be something more, the expression of human feeling or
character.

That music and painting can express these, we know ;
but that with stones and bricks, and wood and plaster, and
while pursuing the vulgar human need of shelter, an archi-
tect should not only express human feelings and character —
such as power or tenderness, refinement or coarseness,
grandeur or meanness — but his own character, seems
strange, — stranger rather that he cannot help doing it.
But to do this a power of architectural expression must be
presupposed, just as a man must have the faculty of musical
expression, to be a composer. So that to get good archi-
tecture, what is wanted is a good architect, one who has
the power to construct and arrange the masses and forms
of a building, and by means of them to express nobleness
or beauty.

There are various ways of disposing building materials
so as to produce artistic results. Mere height has been an
object of architectural effort since the builders at Babel
commenced their tower to reach to heaven, while more
imposing even is the effect of length in endless ranges
of columns and arcades.

Mere mass of perpendicular windowless wall, even where
there has been no conscious aim at architectural effect, is a
most powerful one. It is mainly from this cause that old
Scotch castles are so grand, while their modern imitations,
riddled with windows, are so weak and feeble.


--page 28

--figure 2. Tilquhillie Castle, Aberdeenshire.

But perhaps the more powerful means of producing
grandeur is by shadow — from great projecting cornices, or
under deep porticoes, or in the dark recesses of great
arches.

To the most impressive architecture, mystery is essential
— the feeling that there is something more than we see.
Glory half hid is double in effect. The half, as the Greeks
knew, is often greater than the whole. The plays of
‘Medea’ and ‘Macbeth’ prove that this is equally true in
dramatic art.

Truth is essential in good architecture, as it is in all
art, though in architecture, as in other spheres, it may be
impossible satisfactorily to answer the old question, "What
is Truth?" "Truth" generally means the correspondence
of a representation with the facts; and architecture, to be
true, must be the expression of building necessities. Con-
venience must not be sacrificed to appearance ; materials
must show themselves to be what they really are, and
not something different ; the construction which appears


--page 29

must be that which actually supports the building. But, in
architecture, as in other arts, the representation must be
artistic; not a dull, unarranged, unmodified statement of
facts as they happen to turn up. It is tiresome to tell
everything, as an old woman tells her story, wearisomely
relating whether a thing happened on a Wednesday or a
Friday, giving genealogies and dates of marriage of all the
persons mentioned, though these have no bearing on the
point. The object in a work of art is to convey an impres-
sion. To this all the parts must tend, and what is irrelevant
must be suppressed or modified. A photograph is true
(except that the relation of light and shadow is destroyed by
green or red and yellow all being turned to black), but even
if it represented Nature’s colour, or her relations of light
and shade, it would not be a work of art: it is not the
impression on the mind of an artist expressed by him in such
a way as to impress others; it tells a great many things
which no one is interested to know. So in architecture there
is no need for painfully making every constructive expedient
apparent, and bringing into prominence those meaner
accessories of a dwelling-house, which, however essential,
one does not care to refer to, or force on the attention.
Language shows us that art is not a merely bare and true
representation of facts, in the meanings it gives to "artless"
as truthfully simple, and to "artful" as cunningly false. The
border-line at which the production of artistic effect becomes
falsehood must always be difficult to define. There may be
ugly necessities of building construction, which it is right
to conceal under beautiful forms or fine colour, as Nature
conceals our bones and muscles under the rounded forms and
marvellous flesh-colour of our bodies. As in these, so in
architecture, the fundamental construction, though it need
not be offensively obtruded, should be truly indicated ; and
the greater the amount of truth in materials and construction
that can be expressed without losing sight of the artistic


--page 30

idea at which the architecture aims, the nobler is the archi-
tecture. That of the Romans is not satisfactory. They
ornamented buildings, in which the main construction was
arched, with pillars and lintels borrowed from Greek
architecture ; and
although great
magnificence re-
sulted, it was never
satisfactory, be-
cause it was at
bottom untrue.
Gothic architec-
ture, on the other
Iiand, was truth
itself. Happily
for it, no other
better architecture
was known which
they might have
been tempted to
copy for the sake
of its beauty, and
whatever the ma-
terials or construc-
tion employed,
they were allowed
to tell their own
tale.

In the course
of their growth
many of the older
architectures imitated forms in stone, which had been deve-
loped in older wooden construction, or hewed out an archi-
tecture in solid rock, which had grown in constructions of
built stone (fig. 3).

--figure 3. Rock-hewn architecture, Petra.


--page 31

Such things are interesting to trace, as illustrating the
continuous but inconceivably slow progress of human ideas,
but no architecture can be perfect which retains them.
Nowadays, with the beauties of all known architectures
available for imitation, which can seldom be natural or truth-
ful modes of expression for us, the temptations to this form
of falsity are almost irresistible.

Perhaps no age has ever indulged more than our own
in the shabbier and more vulgar form of untruthfulness,
of attempting to make cheap, mean materials look as if they
were rare and valuable, — painting and sanding deal boards
so that they may pass for solid stone, or graining them to
look like oak or rare marble ; or copying in stucco the archi-
tecture of Italian palaces, and plastering it on common
houses. Some people seem to think that tricks and decep-
tions are legitimate means of producing artistic effects, such
as making a range of small houses look as if it were one
palace, or filling in the pillared recess at the end of a room
with a single mirror without a frame, in the hope of making
the room look twice as large. The deception is soon found
out and becomes ridiculous. One house gets painted which
includes half of some architectural ornament shared with the
next, while the rest remain dingy ; or some stranger breaks
his nose on the mirror by attempting to walk into the
supposed extension of the room. The people who like
these little tricks are often honourable and truthful. Their
morality does not lie in the sphere of art. One of the
honestest men I know was charmed at my mistaking a
wooden oriel window in his house which had been skilfully
sanded over for a stone one. His honesty lay in a different
sphere. Just as, some artists who have a zeal for their art
as earnest as ever burnt for religion — who pursue it for the
love of it, independent altogether of profit — are often careless
about getting into debt, and regard money obligations as
altogether secondary to doing their work honestly and well.


--page 32

In the sphere of art, truth and honesty are as essential to
excellence as to morality ; and our only hope of freshness
and originality in our architecture must lie in allowing it to
express our actual necessities, with perfect naturalness and
truth.

Beauty, though there may be good and noble architec-
ture without it, is essential to the highest forms of the art.
It would be too great a digression in a book on domestic
architecture to attempt to discuss the question why certain
lines are more beautiful than others. One theory is, that
beauty in objects depends on their power of suggesting
pleasing associations. And it is true that these may so
warp our judgment as to give such objects a beauty in our
eyes which they do not in themselves possess. But it will
not account for new objects, with which we have no such
associations, appearing beautiful.

The theory is rather that objects are beautiful because
they suggest pleasing associations from some sort of resem-
blance to them — that a colour, for instance, is beautiful
because it recalls tenderness or purity, or a line because it
suggests strength or grace.

Association of this kind affects our perception of beauty
more subtly and powerfully than accidental contiguity,
sometimes by making us think things beautiful, but still
oftener by suggesting something unpleasing or ludicrous,
and so preventing us seeing beauty where it exists. Beauty
is something distinct from pleasing associations, and we
seem to have as good evidence of its independent existence
as of those pleasing associations which are supposed to
account for it, namely, our perception of it. Its essence
may perhaps lie in the fact, that as we are a part of the
harmonious system of nature, those objects are beautiful to
us which are in harmony with our material and spiritual
being. This would account for the variety of opinions as
to beauty held by different nations, and for the basis of


--page 33

essential agreement among them all, which is shown by the
fact that, by entering into the feelings of their producers, we
may come to understand and admire various and apparently
opposite productions in art.{^1} It is not a valid objection
that some men cannot see beauty in things undoubtedly
beautiful. That is a defect of their nature, like the want of
a musical ear. The poet and painter, by their sympathy
with it, perceive beauty in nature which others do not,
and become its interpreters to these by means of human
sympathy.

No theory of beauty, however, can assist us in deciding
what things are or are not beautiful. For this we must
have "taste," an organisation which is affected by beauty or
ugliness, as the palate is by sweetness or bitterness.

To produce beautiful things something more is needed
— that creative faculty to which new combinations, new
ideas of grandeur and beauty come unsought, which in old
times was believed to be the inspiration of the Deity.

To the greatest architecture the idea of Size is essential.
Its glory is, that it creates its forms on the scale of Nature’s
grandeur. To draw a line of three or four hundred feet
against the sky, exquisitely modelled along its whole length,
is an achievement which raises our opinion of humanity.
Cities are always proud of their spires. St. Paul’s, or one
of the great French cathedrals, makes the same impression
on the mind as a great mountain.

A characteristic of the best architecture, and one which
art of every kind must have in some form or other, is
Delicacy — not the mere avoidance of all coarseness and
vulgarity, but the presence of some kind of refinement — in
form, in colour, or in modulation of shadow. It is for this

{^1} Mr. Darwin is of opinion that the taste of animals in regard to beauty is
substantially the same as in mankind.


--page 34

reason that those who have a little knowledge of an art are
such bad judges of it. Coarse, obvious effects strike them :
they do not see the highest, which are always hidden, like
the violet, and have to be sought.

The main element, however, of architectal excellence is
Proportion. It is difficult to say wherein it consists — as
difficult as to say what beauty is, of which, indeed, it is one
of the elements. No rule can be laid down for it, for it is
of many kinds — tall or low, sturdy or delicate. People have
sometimes amused themselves calculating proportions by
mathematics, which undoubtedly has the power of expressing
them, but only after the proportion has been invented, just
as mathematics can express musical harmonies. But it
would be as possible to design architecture by mathematics
as to compose tunes. A musical ear in the one case, an eye
for proportion in the other, are the only tests of right. The
faculty of expressing ideas by notes harmoniously arranged,
of throwing words into harmonious verse, or grouping the
parts of a building in order and proportion, is the only
means of production in music or poetry or architecture.

The chief sphere in which proportion finds expression in
architecture is in the relation of solids to voids — of the
supported parts to their supports. It does not look at the
problem involved merely from a constructive or engineering
point of view, asking, Will the building stand ? but, Does it
stand with ease and grace? The building must not only
be secure, it must look secure. To attain this result,
a strength beyond mere constructive exigencies is often
required. A massive stone building should not stand
on a glass case, even when there are thin iron pillars
behind the glass, concealed by haberdashery, quite sufficient
to support it. The strength should be visibly ample.
But neither ought the supports to be too strong for their
work : a Doric column carrying only a statue, instead of


--page 35


--page 36

--figure 4. Houses at Münster, showing vertical and horizontal division of their surfaces.


--page 37

its mass of entablature, is a disproportionate waste of
energy.

But although resistance to gravitation is the chief motive
of proportion in architecture, it should equally govern
every space and form of a building — the size and shapes of
the windows, and of the window-panes ; the amount of light
and shadow ; the ornaments and enrichments, not only in
their quantity, but in the mutual relations of their parts.
A common means of attaining it is by lines or mouldings
dividing the surface of a building into spaces, and giving
emphasis where it is wanted.

Such lines when drawn horizontally are called {_string
courses_}. They originally were flat beds of solid stone going
through the whole thickness of a wall composed of rough
irregular materials, so as to strengthen the wall at intervals,
usually at each floor, a level bed for the floor to rest on.
The projecting edge was naturally ornamented with mould-
ing or carving, and later on became a pure ornament of the
architecture, seldom now going farther into the wall than
the few inches necessary to fix it in its place, and I think it
is legitimately used to give to the design the effect of hori-
zontal division, though it does not necessarily indicate the
precise position of the floors. Similar effects of proportion
may be obtained by piers or pilasters dividing the building
perpendicularly.

Two houses at Münster (fig. 4) show this mode of
producing architectural effect. In the farther house, to the
left of the picture, which is late Gothic in style, the idea of
height is more dwelt on ; the upright lines, which take the
form of pinnacles, are kept as a fringe on the outside of the
gable ; in the other it is rather the horizontal lines that are
enforced. Instead of the front running up into the gable,
it is stopped by a strong cornice. The upright lines take
the form of Classic pilasters.

Mr. Fergusson disapproves of the use of pilasters, and, if


--page 38

he were Chancellor of the Exchequer, would put a pro-
hibitory tax on them. But in every style of architecture
effects of proportion have been obtained by enforcing the
perpendicular or horizontal lines. The Greeks enforced the
upright lines by fluting the columns. These bear the mass
of entablature — the frieze and cornice, the horizontal effect
of which is heightened by the deep projection of the
cornice, while the sense of weight in the mass is aided by

--figure 5.

--figure 6.

the triglyphs of the frieze, which, even if they represent
the beam-ends of old wood construction, are now purely
ornamental features (see fig. 20, p. 56).

In our ordinary town houses, where we have only a front
to deal with in which the position of the windows is fixed
by necessity, such expedients are almost our only means of
obtaining architectural effect. Figs. 5 to 8 illustrate some
modes of doing this common in Classic architecture. Fig. 5
is the most naked form of building. In fig. 6 an appearance


--page 39

of strength is given to the angles by building them of larger
stones. The angles of the windows are also protected and en-
riched by a framework round them, and dignity and shadow
is given by ornamenting the cornice and increasing its size
and projection. But if we repeat this process through the five
or six stories of our London houses it becomes monotonous.

Gothic delighted in height, but the tendency of Classic
architecture was to dwell on the horizontal line, and various

--figure 7.

--figure 8.

expedients were resorted to to reduce the apparent height
of the building. One was to bring down the strong line
of the cornice, as in fig. 7, to the top of the main floor of
the building, as if marking its importance and giving it
dignity, and treating the rooms above as if they were only
bedrooms, as ‘an attic,’ as it is called. In the old Italian
palaces, where the great entertaining rooms were at the top
of the house, it was fitting that the great cornice should be
immediately over them.



--page 40

Fig. 8 shows the common Classic mode of producing archi-
tectural effect. The only architecture being in the orders
derived from temples, the house is treated as a temple. The
windows are accidents or necessary evils in the design.
The ground floor is merely a base for a correct superstructure
of columns and entablature. That it comprises two stories
of the house is a regret-
table accident which we
must not dwell on. Yet
noble effects have been
gained by these means,
and dignity and grace
given to buildings other-
wise dull.

--figure 9. House opposite the cathedral at Augsburg.

Symmetry, which may
be considered a species
of proportion, is almost
essential to the noblest
buildings — at least when
it is absent, whatever the
other merits of the build-
ing, the highest dignity is
unattainable. In every
style, Greek, Gothic, and
Renaissance, symmetry
controlled the designs of
temples and churches.

In dwelling - houses,
though often ruling the design as in this instance (fig. 9),
it frequently gave way to the necessities of domestic
convenience. It means that the parts on either side
should be balanced and similar, not necessarily identical,
like the two spires at the end of a modern church,
both executed from the same drawing; but similar, like


--page 41

those of an old cathedral, each retaining its own individu-
ality. Of late years symmetry has not been much in
favour. In the last century it was a universally acknow-
ledged principle. That the door should not be in the
centre was inconceivable. If the kitchens formed one
wing the stables had exactly to match them in the other.
The summer-house at one side of the garden had its
duplicate on the other, even if it was half a mile off.
Perhaps the Scotch gardener carried the principle too far,
who shut up his son in one
summer-house to balance a boy
whom he had locked up in the
other for stealing apples. Now-
adays, we carry the opposite
principle to an extreme. We
put a spire at the side of a
church rather than in the
centre ; and where a door comes
naturally in the middle of the
house, we run up a gable on
one side only to destroy the
symmetry, under the delusion
that we are carrying out Gothic
principles.

--figure 10. Old house in Glasgow High Street.

It appears from this catalogue of the artistic effects
which architecture is capable of producing, that they
are widely various in kind, and that many of them are
incompatible with others. Now, for the perfection of
any work of art, Harmony is essential. All its various
parts should suit one another. Nothing should be out
of keeping. Ladies appreciate this principle in dress; it
would be absurd to wear a brilliant bonnet with a rough
stuff gown. It is so much the essence of music that the
word is used as a name for it, and it is the chief essential


--page 42

in good colouring. And so in architecture it forbids
discord ; there must be no jarring, no part too rich or
refined, or out of keeping with the rest. To strive after
irregularity for its own sake is affectation, but when
it arises naturally from the conditions of building, as

in the little Scotch
house (fig. 10, p. 41), it
may be very pleasing.
It is not the result of
bap-hazard, but comes
through a sense of
art and grace in the
builders, of which they
may have been quite
unconscious.

--figure 11. House near the town hall, Nuremberg.

In the design of this
house at Nuremberg,
(fig. ll) the architectural
effect is obtained with-
out any ornament, solely
by means of proportion,
exercised in a skilful dis-
position of the windows
and roof. By simply
lowering the wall in
the centre, we get the
effect of a mass of roof
flanked by two towers.

If the wall were built
up between these towers
to the level of their cornices, as a London builder would
have done, the design would be commonplace. It is irre-
gular, but there is method in the irregularity. The neces-
sities of internal arrangement make the towers different in
size, but the centre of each is carried down and a feeling


--page 43

of height given by the line of windows one above another.
But for this, the horizontal line would have predominated,
and there would have been no effect of towers in the
design.

Harmony is a universal law of Nature. In a few years
she tones down the harshness of a new building, the rawness
of rough scaur or broken rock with moss and lichens, into
harmony and keeping with everything about it; and in
architecture, even when the forms are bad and the style
feeble, mere harmony will sometimes produce the effect of
beauty.

We dispense with it in our modern architecture to a
wonderful extent ; more than any time or nation hitherto
has done. We think nothing of putting rich stained glass
in a bare, white plastered interior, like a jewel in a swine’s
snout, or spotting the dingiest of cement house-fronts with
flower-boxes made of the gaudiest coloured tiles, and making
abortive attempts at art by furnishing our houses of common-
place builders’ Classic with fiercely Gothic furniture.

On the other hand, so intent are we sometimes to obtain
harmony, that we compel all the houses in a street to be made
from the same design so that a man cannot tell his own
except from the number on the door. In our restorations of
old buildings it has been carried so far that immense quanti-
ties of valuable art have been removed from our churches
and destroyed as not of the same date as the rest of the
building, in forgetfulness of the fact that these are historical
monuments — that their interest lies in each generation
having left its mark on them — that the impression of wealth
and magnificence, and contrast also, produced by the rich
Jacobean carvings so ruthlessly removed, are valuable effects
in architecture, as well as harmony. Harmony consists
rather in identity of feeling than of form or style. The
quaint old Classic screens and tombs, the grace of Inigo
Jones, and the elaborate richness of Grinling Gibbons, are


--page 44

in better keeping with the old buildings than the modern
Gothic which, alas, has so often supplanted them!

Still harmony must be our rule, as it is Nature’s — a rule
not to be broken without cause — to express some higher
meaning, or to preserve some work our fathers have left us.


{+Contrast} is also a means of obtaining artistic effect, more
telling than harmony, though not capable of producing such
perfect results. An exquisitely carved and moulded window
in a great field of plain wall looks more delicate itself, and
makes the wall look grander. In Perpendicular Gothic, on
the other hand, the tracery of the windows is carried over
the walls, making the whole surface harmonious. This
system was thoroughly carried out by Barry in the Houses
of Parliament. But if the building has gained thereby in
harmony and richness, it has lost in power.

Who shall decide where and how far either principle shall
be carried out? what rules can we lay down? Only the
same as for composing poetry or music — the insight and
invention of the musician and the poet — of one who has the
power of composition, of so combining words or notes or
colours as to express human feelings or ideas ; or, in archi-
tecture, of one who can so use his materials as to produce
a building possessing any of the artistic merits we have
enumerated.

In painting and architecture, the laws of composition are
essentially the same : the same kind of considerations regulate
the lines and masses of a picture and of a building. Its chief
aim must be to produce unity, so that, however various the
ideas it is concerned with, they shall unite in producing
one idea, one work of art.

{+Ornament}. — Architecture can produce artistic effects of
this kind without the aid of sculpture or painting or
ornament of any kind, by the mere arrangement of masses


--page 45

of building. Not even such an amount of ornament as a
cable moulding is needed, without which Mr. Ruskin thinks
a mere utilitarian building, like a fortress, cannot be
considered architecture. There is no ornament, not even
the simplest chamfer, on these towers from the walls of
Nuremberg (fig. 12); yet they are examples not of building
only, but of architecture, and not unworthy of the designer,
Albert Dürer. Are not grandeur and impressiveness artistic
qualities? and when old fortresses possess these by their

--figure 12. Towers on the walls at Nuremberg.

mass and strength, and the skill with which they are fitted
to the rocks they crown and give dignity to, although
they may be the most utilitarian of buildings, without a
single ornament or moulding, they may possess the noblest
qualities of architecture. The parapets in old castles
projected on corbels, as in Borthwick Castle (fig. 13, p. 46),
are not designed for ornament, but for the practical
purpose of dropping down stones on assailants.

But though architecture is possible without ornament, it
cannot without it reach its most perfect manifestations. In


--page 46

the great ages of art, sculpture and painting had almost no
existence except as its decorations. The Elgin Marbles are
the decoration of a frieze; the Theseus, a piece of architec-
tural sculpture. In the Middle Ages sculpture was almost
unknown, except as adorning doorways and other parts of

--figure 13. Borthwick Castle.

buildings; while the paintings of that time, and even of the
great ages of Venetian and Roman art, were generally
decorations of the walls or altars, and essential parts of the
buildings.

It may be questioned whether painting and sculpture


--page 47

have gained by their present independence. Architecture
certainly has lost one of the most powerful means of giving
it interest.

Ornament, when employed in architecture merely for its
own sake, and because it is pretty, is weakness. It is
valuable only when it assists the meaning of the design,
enforcing certain lines or points and giving it richness or
softness. For this purpose such an ornament as a Greek
fret (figs. 14, 15) or a chevron (fig. 16),
or lines and dots (fig. 17), may be
not less suitable than the direct imita-
tion of natural objects, such as leaves or
animals, probably more so; for, as a
building is necessarily largely composed
of straight lines, straight-line ornament
may harmonise with it better than the
free and irregular curves of nature. As, in weaving, even
a pattern on a table-cloth so simple as squares like a back-
gammon board may be perfectly satisfactory and ornamen-
tal because it is suitable to the material, and arises naturally
from the processes of weaving.
To follow the spirit of Na-
ture, not to imitate her forms,
should be the aim of art.

--figure 14. Fret.

--figure 15. Fret.

--figure 16.  Chevron.

--figure 17.

I do not know whether
even Mr. Ruskin himself now
holds the theory, stated in
‘Seven Lamps of Architec-
ture,’ "that all beautiful lines are adaptations of those
which are commonest in the external creation" — that in
the Doric temple the cornice and triglyphs are not beautiful
“because unimitative” — that the fluting of the column
derives what low beauty it possesses from its feeble resem-
blance to "canaliculated organic structures." "The Roman-
esque arch," he continues, "is beautiful as an abstract line.


--page 48

Its type is always before us in that of the apparent vault of
heaven, and the horizon of the earth. The cylindrical
pillar is always beautiful, for God has so moulded the stem
of every tree that is pleasant to the eye. The pointed arch
is beautiful; it is the termination of every leaf that shakes
in summer wind, and its most fortunate associations are
directly borrowed from the trefoiled grass of the fields, or
from the stars of its flowers. Farther than this man’s
invention could not reach without frank imitation. His
next step was to gather the flowers themselves, and wreath
them in his capitals." And again, "I believe that we may
reason from Frequency to Beauty, and {_vice versâ_}; that
knowing a thing to be frequent ({_visibly_} frequent), we may
assume it to be beautiful, and assume that which is most
frequent to be most beautiful” — “that forms which are not
taken from natural objects must be ugly.”

On this ground Mr. Ruskin “convicts” the Greek fret of
“ugliness,” because it has no precedent for its arrangement
but the forms of crystals of bismuth, an artificial condition of
a rare metal. The theory is a total misconception of the
whole meaning and use of ornament in architecture. It is
a certain sign of weakness and decay when architectural
ornament is a profuse imitation of natural forms. The beauty
of the Doric column does not consist in its resemblance to
some forms of reeds — some Egyptian ones are much like
reeds, but are coarse and clumsy in comparison — but on its
form being so perfectly contrived for supporting the weight,
and on its flutings and the line of its capital so delicately
marking this purpose; just as the triglyphs have a meaning
(whatever their origin), and therefore beauty, because they
mark the downward pressure of this weight, and the cornice
as giving protection and shadow. The beauty of Greek Doric
does not consist in ornament, which would ruin it, but in
its perfect proportion and delicacy of line. The Corinthian
order, which is a close imitation of natural forms, is vulgar


--page 49

in comparison, and it was consequently a favourite with the
more inartistic Romans. Columns half the thickness would
be liker reeds ; triglyphs carved with natural leaves would
not improve the temple. Without its sculpture, the Parthenon
is still beautiful. No doubt it has lost the last finishing
touch, but the loss is far less than that of its painting and
colour. Alter the relations of the weight of entablature
to the supporting columns, or of the masses of light and
shadow, and its beauty would be gone at once, and all its
sculpture and painting would not restore it.

That Mr. Ruskin’s theory convicts the Greek fret of
ugliness is of itself sufficient to prove it false. If the old
test, “quod semper, ubique, et ab omnibus,” is any test of
truth, the Greek fret can show a higher antiquity and a
wider catholicity than any opinion or religion. In Asia,
whence the Greeks probably got it, in India, in China, in
Japan, it is a favourite ornament. It occurs frequently on
the “sculptured stones of Scotland,” and in caves once
tenanted ; it is found in the New World on the pottery of
Indian tribes in South America. Even Mr. Ruskin himself,
though calling it a “horrible design,” admits that it may be
employed with advantage as an ornament on coins “when
it is small,” as it must be when so used, though it need not
be small in proportion to the size of the coin.

Accepting the fact that mankind regards it as an orna-
ment, let us ask what there is in its form to make it so. May
it not be because it is a succession of spirals {_architecturalised_}
— reduced to straight lines, and brought into harmony with
the lines which, from its essential nature, are dominant in
architecture ; just as the chevron, or the simplest form of
Greek fret, would be a wave architecturalised ? Ornament
composed of straight lines was no doubt first adopted in
barbarous times because it was easily executed, but it con-
tinued to be used in the most refined Greek buildings because
it was felt to harmonise with the architecture. The fret is


--page 50

not a Gothic ornament, though something very like it is
occasionally found among the scarce examples left of painted
decorations in that style, which in those parts of the building
not governed by curved lines of construction, abounded in
ornament equally composed of straight lines, and equally
unlike anything in nature ; such as, for example, the lines
of “stoning” found on old Gothic buildings (fig. 18).

The lines of archi-
tecture and its orna-
ment must of course
be natural — that is,
they must be according
to its nature and con-
stitution ; for the imi-
tation of animal or
vegetable forms may,
for it, be unnatural.
It has an organism of its own— a life which, like all life,
evidences itself in resistance to gravitation, a character
which is noble and beautiful when it fulfils the purposes
of its being, and only that ornament is valuable which
aids in expressing this. “The leaves which shake in the
summer wind” are beautiful in their own place and way,
but their forms may be utterly unnatural in architecture,
and therefore ugly. Gothic arches are beautiful, not be-
cause they are like leaf points — an accurate imitation of
leaf points might make very ugly arches — but because
they are a true, excellent, and vigorous mode of construction.

Mr. Ruskin’s theory of architectural ornament is opposed
by the practical evidence of every style of architecture.
Even when architectural ornament represents natural forms,
it cannot do so by imitating them ; indeed, it is generally
good in proportion as the resemblance is distant. Very
little of the full beauty of a plant can be imitated in stone
or wood-carving. The softness and colour and delicacy of


--page 51


--page 52

--figure 19. Temple of Icarnac in Upper Egypt.


--page 53

nature are unattainable even in marble. The feeling of
growth may be represented ; but this is often best done by
not attempting accurately to imitate the form, which must
be forced and stiffened, so as to have the nature of stone or
wood put into it, and governed by the lines of the architec-
ture, before it can become a harmonious part of wood or
stone constructions. It may then be coloured simply, without
any attempt at the gradations of Nature’s colouring, with
red, or white, or gold. The forms of honeysuckle, or of the
rose or lily, are scarcely recognisable in the Greek honey-
suckle ornament, in the Tudor rose, or the French fleur-de-lis,
though these are much better ornaments in architecture
or heraldry than a more exact imitation of the several
plants.

The term “conventional” has been applied to this treat-
ment of ornament, as if it were only by a common agreement
or understanding that it could stand for the natural objects
it is supposed to represent.

The aim of all architectural ornament, whether sculpture
or painting or carving, is to give richness or expression to
buildings ; and its excellence must be judged of, not by the
accuracy with which it imitates nature, but by the extent
to which it accomplishes its objects in harmony with the
architecture.


These modes of giving expression to buildings have been
employed in different degrees by various nations, in their
several styles of architecture.

Mass and stability — the sense of eternal duration — seem
to have been what the Egyptians aimed at in their buildings.
They used stones of enormous size, and of the hardest kind,
and long ranges of monolithic columns and figures. They
built their walls sloping inwards, as being the most stable
form of construction ; carrying this so far in the pyramids
as to sacrifice to it every other kind of architectural expres-


--page 54

sion. Their ornament, grand, simple, and restrained in its
lines, aided the general effect. They sometimes covered
their walls with hieroglyphics, but the cutting was so
shallow that it never destroyed the sense of mass.

The engraving of the Temple of Karnac in Upper
Egypt (fig. 19) gives some inadequate notion of the gigantic
size of the masses of the architecture.

The Greeks worshipped beauty, and of all nations had
the greatest success in realising it in its highest form of
perfect proportion and exquisite purity and delicacy of
line.

In the architecture of their temples the construction was
of the simplest and most primitive kind. In those of the
Doric order, the purest and most characteristic expression
of Greek art, the building is placed on a platform formed of
great stones, in the finer temples of white marble, spreading
out in steps so as to give the idea of perfect solidity. On
this solid base the columns were placed. The Greek temple
(see fig. 20) was not an enclosed building, but a portico
built round the shrine of the god, giving shelter to the
crowds who came to worship, from rain and sun, not from
the cold.

The Doric column is without a base, or that widening at
its foot used in the columns of other styles of architecture
to obviate the impression that the weight it carries might
sink it into the ground ; because the platform looks solid
enough to prevent any such impression arising. The
column widens from top to bottom in a gentle entasis or
curve, which counteracts the disagreeable appearance a
simple cylinder would have had, of looking thinner at the
bottom than in the middle and top. It is marked along its
length with flutings, a series of slight hollows and edges,
producing delicate gradated lines, which carry the eye
along it and suggest its function of supporting weight.


--page 55


--page 56

--figure 20. Temple at Pæstum, Magna Grecia.


--page 57

To receive the weight it spreads out in the capital, on
which is placed the {_abacus_}, a simple slab of stone. On these,
stetching from column to column, rests the {_architrave_} a
series of solid square stone blocks.

Above this is the {_frieze_}, which occupies the place of the
roof beams of older wooden construction, the traces of which
still remain in the {_triylyphs_}, representing notched beam
ends. In the perfected architecture these fulfil the purpose
of marking the downward pressure of the weight. On
them rests the roof, which projects . in the cornice, so as to
throw the rain off the building, and which crowns it along
its length with a mass of dark shadow. The roof is flat
pitched, for the idea of length, rather than of height, rules
the disposition of the architecture, and forms at the ends of
the building low gables or pediments.

Of architectural ornament there is none ; there is no
carving of the parts into flowers, or cable mouldings, such
as Mr. Ruskin says makes the difference between architec-
ture and building. The Greeks did not use sculpture like
the Gothic architects, marking the construction and forming
a part of it. Many temples, like this one of the group at
Pæstum, in the Greek colony of Magna Grecia, were with-
out it. Where the Greeks used sculpture they set it in the
pediments, grouping it so as to fit their triangular form, or
filling up with it the spaces between the triglyphs ; but
they never applied it or any representation of natural forms
either to the base or architraves, or to the columns, which
are the working members of the architecture. In these it
would have tended to destroy the idea of Greek architecture,
the expression of weight supported with perfect stability
and perfect grace, which gives an impression of strength,
repose, and beauty the highest attainable in architecture.

Mr. Ruskin says it is not much to have done, to rest a
lintel on the top of posts. There is nothing clever in it ;
any infant can do it. The arch was a much cleverer thing


--page 58

to invent. The Greeks knew the arch and used it in
drains underground, but they never showed it in their
buildings. It would have destroyed their god-like repose ;
they felt, as the Hindoos say, that "an arch never sleeps."

The form of the perfect Greek temple was, doubtless,
that of the earliest, which, with the persistency of religious
traditions, has never been departed from. To the simple
forms of Doric architecture the Greeks with their artistic
instincts gave such exquisite proportion as to make it, while
the race lasts, the standard of perfect beauty in architecture.


The Romans were a practical people — builders and
engineers rather than architects. In the time of the Republic
they seem to have had very little art, and scarcely a single
building remains which was erected then.

When, under the Empire, they commanded the wealth of
the world, they were the greatest builders the world has
seen.

Every country they conquered still retains the traces of
their occupation in the paved roads which led from Rome to
the farthest station among the barbarians, permanent camps
defended by towers and enclosed in a great square of
massive walls, so admirably built that they have defied the
weather and the continuous attempt to use them as quarries
ever since, — of aqueducts carried for miles over plains and
bridging great rivers, baths with magnificent halls, basilicas
or covered porticos for administering justice, temples, villas,
theatres, and amphitheatres, where the fights would have
lost their interest without the death of the conquered.
The Flavian Amphitheatre, even in its ruins, fitly expresses
this wealth and universal mastery. (Fig. 21.)

In its system their architecture was that of rulers rather
than of artists. It made admirable use of the means at
its command. The Romans used the unskilled slave
labour which they had in abundance in raising the masses


--page 59

--figure 21. The Colosseum at Rome.


--page 60


--page 61


--page 62

--figure 22. Gothic Architecture. Westminster Abbey.


--page 63

of rough concrete and the great stones of their build-
ings. They covered these with slabs of rich marble,
or adorned them with ranges of arcades, rich vaulted
ceilings, floors of mosaic, monolithic columns of marble
and precious stones, and paintings and sculptures by Greek
artists.

Their buildings were the expression of themselves —
powerful and practical rulers, with an outside coating of
Greek culture, which had not become part of their own
being, and which indeed they did not rightly understand.
The splendour is all gone ; but wherever the Romans
planted themselves, the solid masses of their buildings show
the power which in Roman law and literature and art still
rules our spirits from their urns.

Gothic architecture also had its own expression, charac-
teristic of the races who invented it. It used to be thought
that the idea of a cathedral was derived from an avenue of
trees — the pillars representing the great trunks, the crossing
vaulting ribs copied from the intermingling branches. The
Gothic builders certainly never intended any such imitation ;
their aims were much more practical. From copying, as
well as they could, the remains of Roman architecture beside
them, they were led, as we shall see, in the development of
a mode of fireproof construction, to a new and characteristic
style, which has in it the spirit of the forest and of the
growth of vegetable life, just as Greek architecture has in it
the spirit of the beauty of animal and human form. Their
buildings express strength and vigour, sometimes almost
savage, and high aspirations and striving, rather than
repose, — characteristic of the race that raised them and of
the faith they held.

In the same way every natural architecture expresses the
mental characteristics of the people among whom it has
grown up. We understand most Eastern peoples too little


--page 64

to judge how far the same is true in their case. The
Hindoos have expressed in their architecture, their love of
subtilty and intricacy and minute refinement, their patient
laboriousness and their want of grandeur of character.


At the time of the Renaissance, or Revival of the fifteenth
and sixteenth centuries, the whole social system, the philo-
sophy and the art of the Middle Ages, which had served
their time, and the religious faith also in great measure, were
broken up.

The rediscovered literature of the Greeks and Romans
flooded men’s minds with a new light which made the
previous ages seem dark. Beside the massive grandeur
and simplicity of the old Roman architecture, the worn-out
Gothic seemed everywhere trifling. Ancient literature and
art were deemed {_Classical_} the standards of perfection.

The forms of classic art were universally accepted, but
the Gothic spirit, still vigorous among the northern nations,
worked them out into a new architecture, thoroughly Gothic
in spirit, with a character which for want of a better name
we call picturesqueness. Its effect seems due to happy
accidents, and is rather marred by the regularity and
symmetry which ruled every previous style of architecture,
including Gothic.

For the irregularity which we find in many old Gothic
buildings was not part of their original design. The
Strassburgers at first intended that their cathedral should
have two western towers, but, when they determined to
have a higher spire than any other city, they felt that the
symmetry became absurd and abandoned the building of
the second spire. A similar feeling probably influenced
the builders at Cologne, and when its two western towers
are finished, I believe the result will show that in finishing
only one tower the Gothic builder was right.

The sense of freedom and emancipation which the Revival


--page 65


--page 66

--figure 23. St. Étienne du Mont, Paris.


--page 67

brought, mingling with older mediaeval ideas, showed itself
in the architecture of which the Church of St. Étienne du
Mont, beside the Pantheon at Paris, seems to me a typical
example. There is a richness and sumptuousness in the
building which express the increase of physical well-being
and the joy in physical life of the times. In features and
ornament the design is mainly Classic, but there is nothing
of Classic repose or correctness. The pediments are broken
and twisted into curves, and the Classic mouldings and
ornaments are altered with a freedom which horrifies Classic
purists. The old Gothic spirit shows itself in the general
form, in the high-peaked roof, and in the movement and
energy of the design. The general effect of the design is
rich picturesque confusion, which fitly expressed the spirit
of the times which produced it; perhaps also of our own.


Such are the characteristics of the styles of architecture
which we know best, but they do not exhaust the effects
which architecture can produce ; for if it expresses human
feelings and ideas, it must be infinite in its manifestations ;
and every original building will have some new form of
expression.

It is impossible to lay down any laws by which good
architecture can be produced or tested. It would be a
great comfort if we could have fixed tests in art criticism
to decide what is beautiful ; but no law was ever laid down
which a great artist could not break, and yet at the same
time produce good art. Sir Joshua Reynolds said that no
picture could be harmonious in which blue preponderated,
and Gainsborough painted his ‘Blue Boy.’ It is a law of
composition in painting, that a principal figure should not
be placed in the centre of a picture; yet artists have put it
there, and the picture has looked all right.

Such laws only mean that the harmony they forbid is
difficult; when it is achieved, the success is all the greater.


--page 68

Blue and green are supposed not to go together; yet, in
other instances besides trees against the sky, it is the most
exquisite of harmonies. As well say that the music of a
fiddle is harsh; yes, as we hear it in steamboats. Yet some
people would prefer a popular air so played to a sonata of
Beethoven performed by Joachim.

Who is to decide ? In architecture, as in music, the test
of excellence is the approval of those who combine a
technical knowledge of the art with an inborn power of
appreciating it. Art criticism consists in some one who
possesses this power telling how an art production affects
him, its value depending on the truth and delicacy of his
judgment; or else in his giving the public such information
that they can see from the same point of view as himself.

When a subject is of national interest, the sense of the
community itself perceives a certain way, and, when doubt-
ful of its own opinions, knows whose it ought to trust, so
that it comes to have settled and well-grounded judgments ;
while those who know nothing of the subject are made
aware, by the general sentiment, that they are not entitled
to have opinions of their own.

When the nation generally does not care for an art (as is
our own case at present with regard to architecture), and has
little knowledge of it, it appreciates its coarse and vulgar
manifestations (which, like popular airs, appeal to lower
but more widely-spread sympathies) better than its most
exquisite refinements. In art criticism the public do not
know whom to trust. The mere accident of the critic being
in a good position in society, or being an eloquent writer,
or knowing a little of the subject and being very rich, if he
is an amateur; or, if he is an architect, being a good business
manager, — are common reasons with us for recognising a
man’s authority on architectural subjects; and, the art not
being generally understood, we seldom meet any one who
does not consider himself a perfectly competent judge of the


--page 69

merits of a building. The ultimate object of architecture is
no doubt, to please the public, not the architects ; but if, at
first, it pleases only an ignorant public, it will soon be dis-
tasteful even to them. Its flashy crudities will pall, like
popular airs, but unfortunately its permanence forbids us
forgetting it as we do these.

Of the artistic effects of architecture enumerated in this
chapter, many, such especially as grandeur or sublimity,
would be out of place in ordinary houses. They are attain-
able in palaces ; some of which, notably those of Florence,
are as impressive in their architecture as great religious
buildings.

Nowadays palaces generally are only larger houses to
accommodate a large establishment. State and grandeur
have become irksome to us, and are even despised, no doubt
because so frequently the sign of power which has departed;
and the sense of power consequently seems more exquisite
to us when unencumbered by its trappings. Comfort and
convenience are all that are insisted on.

This change is not advantageous to the development of
the highest type of domestic architecture ; but there is
still room for better art in modern houses than is usually
attained. To express our domestic life, it should be more
pleasing than impressive, more beautiful than grand,
characterised by refinement rather than by state.


--page 70


CHAPTER III.


THE CONDITIONS NECESSARY FOR PRODUCING GOOD
ARCHITECTURE.


{+Why+} is it, that with all our mechanical skill and
appliances, with a power of construction, and a
knowledge of the art of all times which the world never
before possessed, our own productions in architecture are
inferior, in art and in grandeur, to those of our ancestors in
the Middle Ages, who had not a tithe of our wealth or
knowledge — that the churches we build are only imitations
(often far enough off) of theirs, while our best houses are
far inferior to those of Elizabeth’s time ? Not only are we
incapable of rivalling the granite structures of Egypt, or
the marble ones of Greece, but in truth and perfection
of architecture we have been distanced even by poor and
half-savage nations.

The causes of this are an interesting subject of investi-
gation, even apart from the chance that a knowledge of
them may help us to do better.

It may perhaps be said, to account for our undoubted
inferiority, that we are not a building race like the


--page 71

Egyptians, or an artistic people like the Greeks. But our
cathedrals and our old mansions show that, in our own way,
we were once both great builders and great artists.

It might be urged that this is not a building age — that
our life is too hurried, our minds too unsettled, for works
of permanence. A man seldom now looks forward to living
in the same house all his life ; he regards it with no love,
and does not care what it is like, if it is water-tight and
large enough. But with a population rapidly increasing
in numbers and wealth, and in the desire for greater comfort
and magnificence, we must go on building houses, and in
fact the ground was never more rapidly covered — not with
mere tents for shelter, but with houses often absorbing
much of the new-made wealth. We build even for the
pleasure of it, pulling down our cities to re-construct them
with wider streets and handsomer buildings. The country
has been studded with new churches; and public bodies,
from the Government to small town corporations, engage
eagerly in erecting all sorts of buildings, almost all with
some attempt at architectural magnificence. It is not, then,
want of wealth, nor of desire for art and grandeur, nor that
the necessary talent is not born among us, nor a want of
constructive skill, which makes our architecture a failure, as
compared to the old, very much in proportion as it departs
from the old forms. Nor is it ignorance, for we have a
knowledge of the styles and buildings of the world such
as no age ever had before, not by description merely, but
in drawings, measured so accurately that we might re-
produce the buildings.

The cause is not far to seek : it lay in the method or
system under which the old styles were practised, by means
of which success in what they aimed at was universally
achieved.

These old styles were traditional. They each contained
the accumulated experience of the time and country, which


--page 72

had grown up gradually during centuries, each age having
its own methods, being confident that they were the best,
and incapable of even conceiving of any other. For all
men under the same influences of climate, race, and religion,
there was one style of architecture as there was one
language. As the people changed, their style changed
with them. Rude and barbarous at first, it was gradually
refined and improved; and it decayed with the decay
of the nation, or of the social arrangements within the
nation with which it had arisen. Changes were not made
in it for the sake of change, any more than new words are
invented without cause ; but it was not stereotyped — each
tried to improve on what had been done before. Con-
structive and artistic problems were gradually solved ;
imperfections, crudeness and errors corrected ; till, having
arrived at its highest perfection, the necessity of change in
all living things gave it some new aim, generally lower,
less simple and true.

The same system is followed in painting and in all the
arts, and it is the only one by which constant success has
been attained. Though each sees but a little way, he has
the advantage of the thought, the discoveries, and the failures
of his predecessors ; his work is cut out for him — to make
use of, and improve on them. If it is essential to success
in painting, where the picture is the work of a single man,
it is a hundred times more so in architecture, where the
labours of many men and of a dozen different trades and
arts must be united in the construction of a building.

An art conducted in this way must always be right,
for it is natural and true ; always interesting and worthy
of study, as reflecting the thoughts and feelings of the
people, their character and history, how they influenced
surrounding nations, or were influenced by them. Its laws
and development are as regular as those of nature. We
can almost reconstruct an old building, and tell its date


--page 73

from a scrap of its mouldings, as Professor Owen could an
extinct animal from one of its bones.

Architecture with us at present works under very dif-
ferent conditions. Instead of one settled style, which every
one understands, and in which all workmen and artists are
trained, we try Gothic one day, in all its modifications,
from Norman to Perpendicular, and the next, every possible
variety of Italian Classic, with an occasional change to
Greek, Chinese, or Hindoo. In regard to each of them, we
are in the position of a schoolboy making Latin verses.
By the help of dictionaries, and a knowledge of the best
originals, he may correctly and elegantly express even
modern thoughts and feelings ; but his work is not living
art, and can have no human interest except in determining
his place at an examination, by showing how closely he
can copy.

This system of copying arose in the fifteenth century
with that enthusiasm for everything Classic, which tried to
reproduce, not merely the language and architecture, but
even the dress and mode of life, of ancient Rome. But
there are earlier instances in England of copying before the
Classic mania commenced. In the western part of the nave
of Westminster Abbey, built in Henry VII.’s time, the
style of the older work is copied so closely that few but
architects notice the difference. The arches have the same
form as in the earlier work, but the mouldings are per-
pendicular in character. In so doing, the builders were
no doubt artistically right, but it would have been im-
possible for them if they had thoroughly believed in their
own style.

The vitality of the native style was spent. It was
to succumb to the first invader, and the revived Roman
art being received as the outward expression of the new
intellectual life, spread resistlessly throughout Europe,
irrespective of creed, among Catholics, Protestants, and


--page 74

Jews, and has since been carried over the world with
modern civilisation. Spanish, Dutch, and English settlers
took it with them to America. Later emigrations have
localised it in our new colonies. The Hindoos are copying
their masters in this as in other things; and the Turks
are now adopting it as a sign of their capacity for Western
civilisation.

This system of copying, which pronounces architecture
good and correct, the more closely it resembles some style
long since obsolete, produces results very different from the
old, natural method. Instead of changing and advancing
with the life of the nation, it has a tendency to go back to
its starting-point. At first the old model is not under-
stood, and modern elements are mingled with it ; just as a
boy, writing Latin verses, will at first destroy their purity
with English idioms and constructions, all traces of which
he may succeed in removing, when he becomes better
acquainted with the originals. The style is subject to
continual aberrations, making its course not progress, but
see-saw ; for it is dependent not on the accumulated labours
of generations, but on the knowledge and caprice of
individuals.

The earliest Classic in France and England, and wherever
else, as in Venice, the old style was vigorous, was half
Gothic, but gradually it became more classically correct and
uninteresting. Our earliest revived Gothic at Strawberry
Hill is really the ordinary builders’ Classic of the period,
with some pointed windows in it, and ridiculous imitations
of Gothic mouldings. The Perpendicular churches of
thirty years ago are better, but no one could mistake
them, like some we build now, for old ones. Since that
time, the Gothic style, especially in its earlier and more
perfect development, has been thoroughly studied and illus-
trated; some of the churches built in it being nearly as
good as old ones, showing here and there modern develop-


--page 75

ments, while a very few are accurate to the minutest
particulars. Gothic architects, however, do not acknow-
ledge that absolute obligation of old authority, which ulti-
mately deprived the revived Classic of spontaneous life.
Those who have known the style so well as to be imbued
with its spirit, have produced works both original and
true ; but Gothic freedom has oftener merely meant liberty
to go wrong.

One of the worst effects of this system of copying is, that
the striving after correctness and perfect imitation of the
dead standard leads to the adoption of features unsuited to
modern wants. Great porticoes block up the windows of
English country houses ; “the orders,” with their propor-
tions immutably fixed, trammel and spoil the designs;
great pillars block up chapels built for preaching in, and
windows in houses are made pointed, rendering their wood-
work inconvenient and window-blinds impossible.

The evils of copying are multiplied and aggravated when,
as at present, we attempt a number of styles at the same
time. When only one style was practised, there was some
chance of its being understood, at least by experts and
by the learned; and of its being correct, though to the
public uninteresting and unintelligible. How can any
one master the principles and details of half-a-dozen styles,
so as not only to know them correctly, but to enter into
their spirit so thoroughly as to be able to compose in them ?
Some one told Wordsworth of a friend of his who knew
seven languages. “Indeed,” he replied ; “there are few
people who know their own.” Ordinary architects have
about as much knowledge of the different styles they
practise in succession, as couriers have of the half-dozen
languages they profess to speak.

Half-a-dozen different sets of laws being in vogue — some
opposed in principle, and some, those of Gothic especially,
proclaiming the right of variety and individual freedom —


--page 76

ignorant architects, instead of following old work, perfected
by the continuous labour of ages, dignify their own crude
conceptions with the name of originality.

While we confined ourselves to Classic there was a standard
which, though a dead one, recognised as essential an adher-
ence to laws of proportion and harmony, which experience
had gradually perfected. Correct dulness was often the
result, but we were at least saved from the utter defiance of
these laws, which make some late specimens of modern
Gothic the most impudent and offensive erections which the
depravity and ignorance of man has perpetrated.

When a profession is established on fixed principles, like
medicine or law, those who need its assistance may go to a
village doctor or attorney, confident that they will be well
advised, according to the best light of the age ; just as in
old times, when there was only one style, village masons
built good Gothic churches or Classic houses. If we
practised indiscriminately French and English law, with
their variations through five centuries, and a man could
elect to have his case decided by the law as it existed at any
period in either country, only the most extensive reading
and knowledge could fit a lawyer for his profession, and
those who understood their work would be very few. The
actual state of architecture is nearly as absurd as this wild
imagination.

If this is true of those whose business it is to know it
(and that it is so is shrieked through the land by music-halls
and cemetery chapels), what hope can the public, who have
no training in it, have of understanding its principles ? To
the unlearned and ignorant all its styles must be unknown
tongues.

Similar views as to the advantage of the system
under which old architecture was produced, have been
expressed by Mr. Fergusson in his able and interesting
‘History of Architecture’ and throughout his works. But,


--page 77

as to the remedy for the present state of things, opinions
differ.

“The great change which was introduced at the Refor-
mation,” Mr. Fergusson says, “was this. A Technic art
came to be cultivated on principles which belong only to
one of the Phonetic class;” that is to say, architecture,
which is only the useful art of building elevated to a fine
art, as “cooking may be refined into gastronomy and
tailoring into an important art without a name,” came to be
treated as if it were like poetry, painting, or sculpture, one
of the phonetic arts, “merely different modes in which
men’s thoughts can be communicated to other men, or
perpetuated for the use of posterity.” In the technic or
useful arts, those, for instance, connected with food, cloth-
ing, or shelter, progress has been slow and gradual. Each
worker is heir of an accumulated experience, so that any
mechanic can now make a better steam-engine than Watt :
“as in India, at this hour, local masons, who can neither
read, write, nor draw, can design as beautiful buildings as
ever graced that land.” But in the phonetic arts, poetry,
painting, sculpture, “the individual stamps the value.”
“We do not now find men writing better epics than
Homer, or better dramas than Shakespeare. We do not
see finer sculptures than those of Phidias, or more beautiful
paintings than those of Raphael.” “No one dreams,”
therefore, “of altering a poem or of improving a statue
or picture, though they may be the production of inferior
artists. But in the Middle Ages no one ever hesitated to
rebuild the nave of a cathedral, or to add towers or chapels
in the newest fashion to the oldest churches,” just as “no
Comptroller of the Navy ever hesitated to cut one of Sir
W. Symond’s ships in two, if by lengthening her he could
improve her qualities.” “No one has cared to record the
names of the designers of the mediæval cathedrals; pro-
bably nobody knew who the architects were. The art was


--page 78

a true art; it was more difficult to do wrong then than to
do right now. No genius, however great, could then
enable an individual to get much ahead of his compeers,
while the most ordinary ability enabled any one to do as
well as the rest.” But “the individual is now everything
in architectural art, while the age is of as little importance
as in a poem or a picture.” And so “it would be con-
sidered sacrilege to meddle with or attempt to improve
St. Paul's Cathedral, out of respect for Wren” (I only wish
it were so considered), “and Blenheim must remain the
most uncomfortable of palaces, because it was so left by
Vanbrugh.” “The new system subjects art to the caprices
and vagaries of individuals.” “What a man learns in his
lifetime dies with him “his successor has to begin at the
beginning “their careers probably cross each other.”
“An architect in practice can never afford many hours to
the artistic elaboration of his design,” and hence “the
remarkably small amount of thought that a modern building
ever displays. The evil has been aggravated in modern
times by architecture being handed over too exclusively
to professional men who live by it, and generally succeed
more from their businesslike habits than their artistic
powers.” In conclusion, Mr. Fergusson says that, “without
a reorganization of the whole system, we must be content
to allow copying to the fullest extent, and must be satisfied
with shams, either Classical or Mediaeval, until at least the
public are better instructed, and demand or initiate a
recurrence to the principles that guided the architects of
those ages when true and real buildings were produced.”

I do not think it is a straining of Mr. Fergusson’s
opinions to say that his view is that, under the present
system in which architects direct the construction of build-
ings, by means of drawings, good architecture cannot be
produced, and that we should return to the system of the
“true styles,” when there were no architects, in the modern


--page 79

sense, but the employer communicated directly with the
workman who executed the work ; in fact, that architects
should be dispensed with.

These opinions of Mr. Fergusson were restated in three
articles in the ‘Quarterly Review,’ entitled “The State of
English Architecture” (April 1872); “The Completion
of St. Paul’s” (December 1872); and the “Hope of
English Architecture” (December 1874). In these articles
the writer argues that in Greece, Rome, and mediaeval
England (which last, with more patriotism than accuracy,
he says, was “for six centuries the finest scene of architec-
tural display that the world ever saw”), as well as on the
Continent, architecture was produced not by architects
directing workmen by means of drawings, but by men
who, while working with their own hands, had charge of
their fellows as foremen or master-workmen. He quotes
numerous cases in proof of this from Mr. Street’s book on
Spanish Architecture, in a tone which seems to imply that
he convicts Mr. Street of inconsistency in relating them
and yet continuing to practise as an architect on the system
now prevalent. His latest article concludes as follows : —
“Such was the master workman of the past, whose free
imaginative power has ever been the life of art ; and in like
manner the emancipated workman, gloriously ‘impelled,’
must always be, and is, the only real hope of English archi-
tecture.” He expresses his hostility to architects unre-
strainedly. “These eminent persons,” he says, “have been
the bane of art for the last three hundred years.” Again,
he calls them, “A spurious, we had almost said a quack
profession and again, he says, “There will then be no
need of the ‘profession,’ and architects will subside into
their proper places as bookmakers, artists, business men,
students of symbolism and archæology, and, in fact, pupils
and illustrators of those very workmen whom they now
profess to direct and to control.”


--page 80

The opinions above recited assert or imply not only that
in the best times of the art architecture was produced
without architects, but that this is the only right way of
producing it. If they have any practical meaning, and are
to influence the conduct of any one in the present day
who is thinking of building, they amount to an advice
to him not to go to an architect for his plans, but to
work them out himself with some intelligent foreman or
builder.

The subject is of importance, not only to architects, but
to the public, who, I believe, would get worse architecture
than they get even at present, if they attempted to put
the advice into practice.

Mr. Fergusson believes that our modern architecture is
bad, because since the Reformation the art has been con-
ducted on a false method ; that whereas it is a “technic”
art, it has been treated as if it were a “phonetic” art, like
sculpture or poetry ; and that instead of developing by a
natural process of evolution, it has been under the control
of individuals.

This distinction has not, I think, any existence in reality.
The arts which Mr. Fergusson calls “phonetic” do not
arise out of the gift of speech, as Mr. Fergusson asserts, but
are rather substitutes for speech. He seems to have classi-
fied the arts as technic and phonetic, putting aside the
familiar distinction of the arts as useful and fine, in order
to avoid classing architecture as a fine art with painting and
poetry. But in truth the distinction between these arts
does not lie in the subject-matter of the art, but in the
manner of treatment. Any useful art may become a fine
art by having added to it the element of fineness — of beauty
of colour or form, or of expression, that is, any element
making it the vehicle of human feeling or emotion, such as
tenderness, gladness, solemnity, or even, perhaps, mere
refinement and perfection in work. “Every useful art,”


--page 81

Mr. Fergusson admits, “is capable of being refined into a
fine art.”

.Architecture is not only a fine art, but it is included in
Mr. Fergusson’s definition of the “phonetic” arts, being
one of the noblest and most lasting “modes by which men’s
thoughts can be communicated to other men, or perpetuated
for the use of posterity.”

Now, one of the results of an art developing into a fine
art is that, the art expressing the personal emotions and
feelings of the artist, we come to have an interest in his
personality. We resent the alteration and interference of
others, as destroying the value of the work — the art becomes
individual.

This, at least, is the case in our present state of society
and civilisation. But in certain states of society we find
arts flourishing in what we may call a traditional manner.
Their origin is lost in the past. They are handed down
from father to son. They are understood by the whole
community, and seem the expression of the national
character. Their progress is slow and gradual, and we
can measure it only by comparing the productions of the
art at long intervals. This is what Mr. Fergusson means
by a “true” style of architecture. But he is in error in
saying that architecture differs in this from poetry and
other arts; for, in primitive states of society, we cannot
recognise the individual inventors in poetry and sculpture
any more than in architecture. They are lost in the
community, or in a school of poets or sculptors handing
down a tradition. In them as in architecture the age seems
everything, the individual little or nothing. Mr. Fergusson
ranks Homer with Shakespeare, as both equally historical
personages. But few now hold that the poems of Homer
are the work of any one man. They and other early Greek
poems come to us as the collected traditions of the schools
of professional singers and rhapsodists, who recited them at


--page 82

the public festivals. In the early history of every race
literature and all the arts exhibit the same characteristic.
The folk’s lore and national tales, characteristic of the genius
of each people, even when traceable to some source common
to them with other races, and the national proverbs are all
authorless, so far as we know, and with as much truth as a
style of architecture or ornament might be said to be the
result of slow accretions of tradition. But no one would
think of calling only such national poetry and literature
true, and what has been written by poets whose names we
know false, or of lamenting that under our modern system
literature had lost its ethnological value.

The art of sculpture was practised in the same anonymous
traditional manner. It was a useful art to begin with — to
supply idols for worship, of the rudest kind, as we see from
those lately found at Hissarlik (claimed as the site of Troy).
The growing refinement of the Greek race, which tingled
with art to the finger tips, in time made these statues of
the gods the highest expression of art which the world
has seen. Early Greek coins show a slowly developing
tradition. The later coins of Syracuse are signed by their
engravers.

It is the same in the art of music ; each nation has its
national airs, breathing the spirit and sentiment of the race,
handed down by tradition, and doubtless changing and
growing as each musician passed them on. But since the
time of Palestrina, composers, like architects, have asserted
their individuality, and the history of music, like that of
architecture, as Mr. Fergusson complains, has become an
account of the lives of inventors.

In other departments the same thing is seen. Any ship
carpenter used to be able to build a ship about as well
as any other. Now we have individual inventors; and
though this takes from us the safety of slow progress,
and renders us liable to a fiasco like the {_Great Eastern_}, no


--page 83

one thinks of urging that the designing of ships should be
relegated back to the working carpenters.

In like manner the so-called phonetic art of painting has
passed through a stage similar to that of the “true” styles
of architecture — the state in which it was in Italy when
Cimabue gave it life, in which it still exists, in the supply
of pictures for Greek churches — a fine art in a sense, not
without a sort of beauty, under its conditions — a tradition
transmitted by common workmen, gradually changing with
the advancement or decline of the race.

The state of society in which the arts are traditional, is a
state of stagnation. There is a very small stock of ideas
common to all the tribe ; every man thinks exactly as his
neighbour and as his fathers did before him. All wisdom
comes from them, and the old men as nearest the source are
the sole repositories of truth. New ideas are regarded as
blasphemy, and if they spring up are crushed out by the
common sense of the people. The thoughts and ways of
other nations are regarded with hatred as things the earth
should be purged of ; or, if with tolerance, as strange and
inconceivable. Customs are often circumscribed in the
narrowest districts : each village has its own peculiar dress,
each district its own type of building.

The period during which a nation may remain in such
a state is absolutely indefinite. Many savage tribes appear
never to have changed since the stone age. The East is
still much as it was in the time of Moses, and from its daily
life supplies illustrations of Biblical customs. The break-
ing up of such a state of things is always an epoch in a
nation’s history, filling it with the gladness of new birth.

It came to the Florentines, in the art of painting, when
Cimabue for the first time painted a Madonna with some
touch of human feeling — when he made the art phonetic, as
Mr. Fergusson would say ; and, however feeble the flicker
of life in the picture, as it hangs gaunt on the wall in Santa


--page 84

Maria Novella, may seem to us who know what the life
grew to of which it was the germ, it filled the people with
such joy that they carried it with shouting and triumph
through the streets ; so that to this day the suburb through
which it passed is called the Borgo Leto.

In our own day a new birth has come to the Japanese,
affecting not their art only, but their social state and all
their customs. Their art, which to us was a new sensation,
seems now crude and barbarous to themselves. They are
delighted with the new idea of perspective and distance.
Marching in the ranks of European civilisation, they glory
in black trousers and tail coats, as the outward and sensible
sign of their new inward life. One who was present in
Japan during the change told me that though the command
of the Mikado, believed to be divine, was needed to start
the nation on its new road, even that would be powerless
now to arrest it.

The same sort of thing is happening everywhere. Travel
is losing its interest, for every place is getting like every
other. The beautiful national costumes of Norway are dis-
appearing. All our own old ways are dying out. The
Great Exhibition of 1851, it has been not untruly said,
destroyed the last remnants of art in England. Everywhere,
the old traditional arts are perishing. New Turkey carpets
are harsh and bad in colour. We only know what their
colour once was when we see an old one in some country
house where the furniture has been unchanged for a
century. Every year, in India, carpets with the exquisite
old colour have to be sought for farther up the country. If
Mr. Fergusson went back there, I fear now he might not
find his village mason building the traditional tombs. In
Persia the art of carpet weaving has perished, by the
destruction of the old weavers in the famine, and the
country has taken to European ways. All over the East
the art which has lived there since the days when the


--page 85

mother of Sisera looked for her son returning from battle
with “a prey of divers colours of needlework,” is disappear-
ing. Our age of steam and universal inter-communication
is witnessing the destruction everywhere of arts which have
their roots in the earliest traditions of the race. Their con-
tinued transmission depended on a stagnant social condition.
When that is broken up they perish with it. It is sad, but it
is inevitable ; for, once a man has known individual freedom,
he can never again be a mere transmitter of tradition.

And this is the age in which Mr. Fergusson tells us to
return to those old ways in architecture, which he says we
gave up three centuries ago. He might as well tell the
dead to rise. His ‘History of Architecture of all Countries
from the Earliest Times to the Present Day,’ is of itself a
proof that we have emerged from the state which conceives
its traditional ways the only possible ones — that we can
appreciate new and foreign ideas. If they seem better to
us, we are sure to follow them under the guidance of their
originators, not of common workmen who do not understand
them.

There is thus no ground, in fact, for Mr. Fergusson’ s
division of arts into phonetic and technic ; the first produced
by individuals, whose names we know ; the latter anonymous,
transmitted by tradition, and, advancing by the slow im-
provements of ordinary and unknown men ; anonymity
and transmission by tradition have been at certain times a
condition of all other arts as well as of architecture.

Equally erroneous is the assertion, on which depends Mr.
Fergusson’s division of the history of architecture into two
markedly different periods, that, till the Reformation, the so-
called true system everywhere prevailed ; and that, since
then, the so-called false system has prevailed throughout
Europe.

It is no doubt true that most of the old styles of architec-


--page 86

ture, especially those which continue, as in India, to the
present day, were practised by common workmen during
long periods as traditional styles, and continued gradually
progressing without any such change as to be marked by
the names of the architects. But I think it can be shown
that this is not true as regards the rise of Gothic architec-
ture. It arose in France in the building of the great
cathedrals, during a period of remarkable social and mental
activity, when the towns threw off the fetters of the feudal
system, and gained their liberties and the right of having
walls. It was an outcome of that Renaissance within the
Middle Ages, which produced the free thought of Abelard,
the love poetry of Provence, the new music of rhyme. The
rise of the new architecture was rapid, the whole of the
French cathedrals having been built and left almost as we
find them within a period of eighty years.

It was not a slow improvement of traditional ideas by
unknown workmen. On the contrary, we find in it one of
Mr. Fergusson’s characteristics of a “false” style; we know
the names of the architects.{^1} They seem in many cases to
have been laymen, judging from their names and the lay-
man’s dress in which some of them are represented on their
tombs.

In the centre of a labyrinth marked in lines on the pave-
ment of Amiens Cathedral, lately destroyed, were engraved
the names of the “masters,” who in succession directed the
works in the beginning of the thirteenth century — Robert
de Luzarches, Thomas de Cormont, and his son Regnault.
Peter of Montereau, in 1240, was commissioned by St. Louis
to build the Sainte Chapelle at Paris. With his wife he
was buried in the choir of the Lady Chapel of St. Germain
des Pres, now destroyed, which also he designed.

{^1} The Cistercian Abbeys in Yorkshire, which are the earliest pure Gothic works in
this country, seem to have been the works of the monks themselves. William of Sens
and William “the Englishman,” were both Benedictine monks.


--page 87

Libergier was the architect of the very perfect Church
of St. Nicaise, at Rheims, as his tombstone, removed on the
destruction of the church to the cathedral, tells us. Peter
de Corbie built several churches in Picardy, and probably —
Viollet-le-Duc thought — the chapels of the apse of Rheims.
John de Chelles constructed, in 1257, the gables of the
transept, and the first chapels of the choir of the Cathedral
of Paris. In 1277, Erwin of Steinbach commenced the
great doorway of the Cathedral of Strassburg.

The names of the masters who directed the work at
Rheims, Noyon, Laon, and built the façade of Paris, are
lost ; as, they well might be, from the lapse of centuries and
the destruction of records in France. But the instances
given, collected by Viollet-le-Duc, show that Mr. Fergusson
is wrong in stating that no one seems to have cared to
preserve the names of the designers of the Mediaeval
cathedrals. The preservation of Villars de Honnecourt’s
sketch-book shows that the small respect in which the
Reviewer holds architects and their drawings was not
the feeling of the thirteenth century.{^1}

The Reviewer and Mr. Fergusson may, perhaps, answer
that these men were not architects, but master-workmen.
But while the sketch-book proves that Villars designed and
directed work by means of drawings, there is nothing to
show that he worked with his own hands at the buildings ;
while the plan which he gives us of a church, designed by
himself and his friend, Peter de Corbie, seems as much
individual work as any produced under the “false” system.

These men, it is true, may have been engaged on only
one cathedral at a time. But a cathedral, as then conceived,
with its wealth of design, furnished ample work for the life-
time of any man. It might, perhaps, be an improvement

{^1} Britton gives in his ‘Christian Architecture’ a list of over 150 architects
employed in England during the Middle Ages, together with the churches which
they erected.


--page 88

on our practice if we had a greater number of competent men
among whom our great works might be distributed, so that
one architect might give his whole time and thoughts to each.
But this does not prove that architects should be superseded
by workmen. Our difficulty is the system of building con-
tracts, which compels the planning of the building to its
minutest details, usually in haste, before it is commenced,
and which makes after-revision and improvement difficult.
And when we see the enormous number of buildings,
sometimes designed by modern architects — as, for example,
the brothers Adam — all over the three kingdoms, — all
full of invention, elegant, finished, and correct according
to their own style, we are bound to admit that the fact of
an architect designing a great number of buildings, does
not prevent his doing good and original work, full of
variety. The result, however, is harder to attain now than
formerly, when all workmen were trained in the same style
as the architect himself.

The instance of the Cathedral of Gerona, in Spain, where,
in 1320, an agreement was made with a French architect,
Jacques de Favariis, to superintend the works, and to visit
them six times a year, seems very like our modern practice.
We have documentary evidence that the design of these
buildings was in each case the production — or, at least,
under the control — of an architect superintending every part
of the work from the foundation to the furnishing. The
structure of the buildings themselves proves it, from their
unity of design, and from the admirable adjustment of the
various parts — a result which, in a new art rapidly de-
veloping, and before its principles were settled, could not
have been attained by any mere understanding among
hosts of workmen. It might perhaps be possible in a fully-
developed art, with established principles and traditional
modes of work, as in fact happened in late Gothic art, the
various trades, without an architect to direct them, working


--page 89

harmoniously enough together at the sort of buildings to
which they were accustomed. But this system might fail,
as Yiollet-le-Duc shows it did, in the restoration of Rheims
Cathedral after the fire in the reign of Louis XI., when the
building and its architecture were strange to the workmen.

I think, therefore, there is ground for believing, that, at
the rise of Gothic architecture, buildings were designed by
architects having much the same functions as those of the
present day.

It can be shown still more easily that the second part of
Mr. Fergusson’s statement, namely, that the so-called false
system has prevailed throughout Europe since the Reforma-
tion to the present day, is erroneous ; for the evidence of
the contrary is everywhere round us.

Architecture took a new start in the fifteenth century in
Italy, im the sixteenth in England. Gothic had solved
its problems, had reached the limit of height in cathedrals,
the limit of twisting stone in tracery windows, and of tracery
decoration on the walls ; while in England it had stiffened
into Perpendicular, and, for reasons, logically good, the
pointed arch had been gradually flattened till it became a
straight lintel. The art could go no farther. In a stagnant
state of society it would have lingered on, degraded like
modern Chinese pottery, but in the creative age of the
Renaissance it had lost its interest and was thrown aside
like a sucked orange.

In the state of Gothic at the time, it was impossible that
an age which had found a new life in Classical literature
and sculpture, could avoid adopting Classic architecture.
But the Renaissance architecture was not mere copying,
as Mr. Fergusson seems to assert by his nick-name of
“copying styles.” The great palaces of Rome and Florence
are original works, not copies of old Roman remains. The
age was fortunate in France, Germany, and England, not


--page 90

only in the possession of great original architects, but in
the good sense to employ them instead of mere copyists
and bunglers. Thus the new style became established as
the style of Europe and of every country which adopted
European civilisation. It soon came to be worked on
the system of what Mr. Fergusson calls a true style, not
by original architects, but by workmen following a tradi-
tion. It mingled with such traditions of the old Gothic as
remained in each country, each of which produced its own
type of the new style ; and, notwithstanding the more
frequent employment of architects during the last few years,
it still remained the traditional style everywhere. Every
workman has been apprenticed to it and understands it ; and
in it builds without drawings, according to Mr. Fergusson’s
“true system,” those houses which Englishmen who must
live in them justly abuse. The style has, to borrow a
term applied in ecclesiastical controversy to a true church,
a {_note_} of a “true style;” it is practised by workmen as
by an instinct; its productions can be reasoned about
with the same certainty as those of the instincts of the
lower animals; and, like them, it sometimes produces
curious results by being followed out in unsuitable circum-
stances. I remember once seeing a row of houses in a
street where the side wall of the last house overhung a
wooded bank and commanded an extensive view. Reason
would have put the windows in this wall, but the builder’s
instinct prompted him to make this house exactly like the
others, and to make the wall blank like the other party-
walls, with the chimneys in it.

It would seem then from the history of the Gothic and
Renaissance styles that it is law of progress in architecture
that architects with the gift of originality, and whose
names have consequently been remembered, design original
buildings. The new fashion is imitated by the ordinary


--page 91

workman, and a traditional, or true style (if Mr. Fergusson
prefers so to call it), is established, which continues de-
veloping by constant changes, till a new “epoch-making”
period of mental activity gives a chance to original minds
to make a new start. The same thing happens in other
arts. Our original painters, like the old masters, have each
their school of followers. When railways were first started,
original minds, like George Stephenson’s, were needed to
lay them out ; now any contractor, even any common
workmen, can make them. Any fool now can go to America
or make an egg stand on its end, though it needed a
Columbus to do either for the first time.

The late Gothic revival is an instance of the same thing.
Pugin and others started it, and his works, though among
the earliest, are still among the best, because they possess
the originality of genius. The style has now become
traditional, with established forms and modes of work, if
not for houses, at least for churches ; not among workmen
who, though they make abortive attempts in it, being still
imbued with the degraded Classic traditions, have never
understood it ; yet with architects who, except when they
unite with bad taste a belief in their own originality, design
fairly good Gothic churches.

This is also true of the new fashion of so-called Queen
Anne ; although those whom accident may have caused to
be accounted its leaders may not be those who first started
it. The London builder is adopting its features, with more
chance of success than in Gothic, since it is the natural
outcome of London materials and modes of work ; but it is
to be feared that both he and the more ignorant architects,
in attempting to avoid commonplace may run into vulga-
rity, to keep clear of which, in this style, requires the
constant restraint of good taste and refinement.

We see, then, that in architecture, as in other arts, in


--page 92

times of which we have any record, we can trace the rise of
new inventions and know the names of their authors, while
in times of which the records are lost, the names of the
poets and sculptors have perished equally with those of the
inventors of new styles of architecture. The anonymity
of the “true” styles of architecture is an accident of our
ignorance, not inherent in the nature of the art, and forms
no ground for distinction between it and other arts.
Reasoning from what we know to have happened in
historical times, we may be certain that the earlier improve-
ments in architecture, great or small, were not made by
common workmen or by the general sentiment of the
community, but by individual inventors whom then, as now,
the multitude copied and followed. If these old works of
art express the feelings and genius of the race, it is because
the race adopted them as the expression of their own
thoughts. National poetry is the creation of individual
poets, national music of individual composers, and national
architecture of individual architects, and the patterns and
colours which we admire in Eastern carpets, are the in-
vention of some long dead and forgotten designer. These,
each in his own art, impressed their thoughts onthenation,
so that they became the expression of the national sentiment.
Everywhere, and in all time, progress has been determined
by the individual. Tennyson’s soft music has infected all
the youth of our age. Before him was Campbell, “blowing
trumpets and beating drums.” For a time all aspirants to
poetry were Byronic. When we go far back in time, we
must believe that there was same infection of personal
influence and mood.

Now, as in all time, individuals, however remarkable
they may be, are, in a sense, the products of their age and
country ; but there is no reason for thinking they were
more so formerly than now.

And architecture is necessarily a product of its time,


--page 93

and influenced by national movements rather than by
individuals, to a greater degree than an art such as poetry,
for several reasons. For in the first place, in domestic
work, it must suit itself to our life and habits; and these do
not readily change, even for the better, at the bidding of
any single individual ; while, in its application to religious
purposes, it is dependent on the prevailing religious senti-
ment. The romantic revival in architecture was a sequence
of the romantic spirit in literature and religion, and it will
last as long as these.

In the second place, originality has not the same chance
of showing itself in architecture as in poetry. A poet
produces his work notwithstanding that his audience is
unfavourable; and if, as in the case of Wordsworth and
Tennyson, it is received at first with opposition and ridicule,
if the work is genuine, time will give it currency and favour.
But an architect’s work must be approved before he is
employed ; and in his case, as in the poet’s, new ideas being-
strange, are received with opposition and dislike all the
greater the better they are, and the higher they rise above
the heads of the people. It is sad to think of the good
buildings which have been lost to us from this cause. We
wasted our gift of Pugin. We may see in his little church
at Ramsgate, where he had his own way, and which seems
almost to contain in itself the whole Gothic revival, what a
wealth of architectural design he could have given us if we
had had eyes to see and hearts to receive it.

A third reason why architecture cannot be so dependent
on individual originality as poetry or literature, is that a
building cannot, like a poem, be the work of one man. No
doubt, by full and careful drawings, one man can direct a
work down to its minutest details, and in the present state
of workmen’s training, this is the only way to get it right.
But in such a state of things architecture labours under
enormous difficulties. The men who are capable of doing


--page 94

this when, as at present, architecture has no settled rules, and
they are left to their own innate taste and sense of right,
are necessarily few, and they are the least likely to be
employed. The public taste is ignorant and uninformed ;
debased by a vulgar sensationalism to which the boasted
freedom of Gothic has too readily lent itself. It is otherwise
when the laws of art are settled, when they are universally
diffused, learned as traditions of the trade by apprenticeship,
and practised without difficulty by men who could never
have invented them. Then the work of architects, sculptors,
carvers, painters, furnishers, fits together naturally and
without effort. If we ever get back to such a state, it will
not be by a fortuitous concourse of common workmen, but
by men who can conceive, see clearly, and work out new
order and beauty. The hope of our architecture depends on
our having men who can do this, and on our giving them
the opportunity of doing it. But, as in Pugin’s case, there
is more chance of our having the men than of their being
employed.

We agree with Mr. Fergusson and the writer in the
Quarterly, that the present unsettled state of architecture is
a misfortune to the art. But the causes lie deeper than
architects can control ; they cannot change the spirit of an
age; they are but straws in the tide of opinion which, in
more important matters than architecture, is in a state of
flux and movement.

But all the more on this account does it seem to me our
duty to preserve, instead of destroying, such building tradi-
tions as remain among workmen, to give new vigour and
interest to a style still living, though commonplace and
degraded, and to give beauty and refinement to forms which,
left to uneducated builders for half a century, had become
vulgarised, while the talent and refinement of the country
were following the new cry after Gothic.

This consideration is, I think, a good justification of


--page 95

the reaction towards the freer forms of Classic, which
is now influencing our architecture, though its cause lies
deeper.

When the Reviewer says that the hope of English
architecture lies in the working man working without the
aid of architects, on the traditional system of the true
styles, we answer, that we have had that condition for fifty
years, and the result is our dismal suburbs of London
builders’ houses. It was not in this way, as we have seen,
that architecture progressed in the past, and, as Bishop
Butler says, there is no reason to believe that it will be
otherwise in the future.

There may be virtue in working with our hands. The
digging and delving to which Mr. Ruskin has set some
Oxford undergraduates may be wholesome moral training.
Mr. Gladstone may find benefit in felling trees. Monks,
old and modern, have believed in the virtue of manual
labour. It might be well for everybody if the old custom
of apprenticing every lad, however rich, to some hand-
working trade still prevailed. But the discipline has been
recommended for its moral rather than its intellectual
benefits, and in architecture especially it is brains, not
hands, that are wanted for designing; where a workman
has them it is waste to keep him to manual labour. That
architects, as well as poets, will be born among them is to
be expected, and the instances which Mr. Fergusson and
others give of common workmen designing great buildings
in modern times are merely examples of this, not of a
return to his “true” system of architecture. The church
at Mousta was a break in the current building tradition of
Malta, a bad copy of the Pantheon (including the two
modern towers which spoil it), cleverly carried out. That
its designer, Anthony Gatt, got only fifteenpence a day is
an accident similar to Milton’s getting only ten pounds for
‘Paradise Lost.’ Both ought to have got much more, but


--page 96

the best reward of both, as of every true artist, was their
delight in doing the work.

The Reviewer’s instance of the Scott Monument at
Edinburgh, designed by Kemp, originally a working car-
penter, is still more unfortunate for his argument. Not
without faults, for the worst of which — the spoiling of its
line at the top by the introduction by the Committee, after
his death, of a projecting gallery — Kemp is not responsible,
it is a true work of genius, striking in design and perfectly
truthful in construction. But it is not a production of a
true style, but something altogether new to Edinburgh.
Neither is it an instance, as the Mousta Church may be, of
the designer working at it with his own hands, for it is one
of our few buildings which are wholly of mason work.
Kemp, its architect, was by trade a carpenter (or wright,
as he would call it), who probably never cut a stone in his
life, but whose trade gave him the practice of making
working drawings. He was, in fact, one of the sketching
architects whom the writer condemns. One of his friends,
beside whom I worked in the office at Edinburgh where I
was apprenticed, told me that Kemp used to disappear for
long periods, during which he went abroad, and, working
at his trade sufficiently to support himself, employed himself
in sketching the old buildings of continental towns.

The talent for designing architecture, like that of making
poetry, may be born in any rank. Bishops may have had
it, and when the principles and practice of the art were
commonly understood (as we may hope to have them again),
they may have found no difficulty in carrying out their
ideas ; though in the instance the Reviewer quotes, where
the church tower fell down from having a bad foundation,
it might have been better for the bishop if he had had a
competent architect to consult. I see no reason why women
should not have it. I have known some ladies excellent
planners. One of our best artists in furniture and decora-


--page 97

tions is a lady. Lord Burlington, doubtless, was an archi-
tect, though Colin Campbell, in his ‘Vitruvius Britannicus,’
inserts Burlington House as his own design. Builders may
have it, and some large firms supply the want of it by
keeping an architect on the establishment, though their
designs often fail, not only through commonplaceness and
poverty of invention, but in the management of lighting
and in planning. It is within my experience that a builder,
asked to do some work requiring design, has come to an
architect to advise him. I think he showed more wisdom
than his employers, and that we would have better archi-
tecture if builders oftener did the same.

To say that workmen only can produce good architecture
is absurd and contrary to fact, and I do not believe they
would thank us for pushing them into this position. I have
had occasion to know something of them, and have found
them mostly honest and sensible, perhaps with an over-
veneration for acquirements in others which they did not
themselves possess, with an interest and pride in their work
and in the design they were helping to carry out, and
conscious that, to produce better art than they were used
to, they must work under guidance. I have heard a differ-
ent account of them — that they take no interest in their
work, that all they care for is to get as big a wage and to
do as little work as possible for it. Doubtless, this is partly
true, and the trades’ union regulations seem framed to foster
these feelings. But who first taught them to give as little
and to get as much as they could ; that their only value was
their market value; that it was all a question of hard
bargain, in which considerations of sentiment or honour
were out of place? If, in dealing with men, political
economy has dropped out humanity as a factor in the
problem, it is not the teachers of its dreary gospel who
should complain that the workmen have taken them at
their word.


--page 98

Working men would not appreciate being left to make
designs themselves, or understand the writer’s veneration for
them. Hero worship has reason in it, but I can see none,
nor would they, in his new worship of the working man.

We have no directions, either from Mr. Fergusson or his
supporter, as to the practical steps which the public should
take to introduce the “true” system of architecture. On
one point I would desire information, namely, which of the
numerous trades connected with house building — bricklayer,
plasterer, carpenter, plumber, bell-hanger, decorator, &c. —
is to have the direction of the work ? Old buildings were
not so complicated ; the other trades were subordinate to
the mason ; but a mason nowadays would find himself very
helpless in adjusting the requirements of a modern house.
Our London builders’ houses, though each merely a repeti-
tion of what has been done a thousand times, do not give
hope for the system of leaving workmen to their own
devices. It is, indeed, a curious theory that knowledge,
education, and refinement should be hurtful to an art, to
the proper practice of which, in the present day especially,
they are essential. Because architecture, in a wholly differ-
ent state of society when good art was traditional, was
practised successfully by men who could neither read nor
write, there is no reason to infer that the right way to
advance it now is to leave it in the hands of ignorant men.
If our architecture be in the deplorable state which is
asserted, it needs to raise it not ignorant men, but men who
unite the faculty of original design to education, refinement,
and special training for the work.

But, it may be said, have we not precisely such a class
in the architectural profession? Why, then, is our
architecture a failure ? Why are so many bad and unin-
teresting buildings now erected ? Why does our architecture
alternate between mean commonplace and forced striving
for effect ?


--page 99

Several answers may be given. It may be said that our
system has failed, because the architectural profession has
not, on the whole, possessed the necessary requirements for
their work.

Or it may be said that our system has not failed ; that
our architecture is in a very satisfactory state ; that the
recent criticisms are false ; and that if the public are dis-
satisfied with us, as we are told, it only shows their
ignorance and unreasonableness. I do not think it would
be wise for architects to rest content in such assurance.
It would not tend to restore the confidence of the public in
them; and, indeed, none of them believe it, for though each
may consider his own works excellent, he thinks other new
works faulty, and far inferior to old ones. Architects
should remember that, unlike painters and authors, they
have hitherto almost escaped public criticism. Those who
had the necessary knowledge felt they could not with
propriety criticise unfavourably the work of professional
rivals, and amateur criticism was generally valueless from
ignorance.

A great deal of the architecture produced is, it must be
confessed, very bad. In Gothic, the plainer buildings look
poor and raw ; the more expensive are overloaded with
ornaments and pillars and tracery not called for by use or
construction, or are hacked with wild ugly coarse notchings,
as if attempting to look barbarous; while our Classic buildings
generally want the finish and refinement which character-
ised those of the last age when the style was better under-
stood. Nor do I believe that those who come after us will
thank us for our restorations, which, conducted apparently
on the principle that the memorials of Tudor times and of
the Church of England since the Reformation are of no value
and are even abominations, have destroyed the interest
attaching to so many of our churches as continuous records
of successive generations ; have altered buildings which have


--page 100

been landmarks for centuries ; have substituted for the
memories of the past the meddling of an architect ; for
the grey tone of age, Kent rag with black pointing, bad
stained glass, and Minton’s tiles. If the few churches still
untouched are left alone, and merely kept in repair, they
will be the most interesting in England, well worth a
pilgrimage. The destruction of historical records, which
the restoration mania has achieved, is due, however, less to
architects than to the zeal of the clergy, whom architects
have often prevented from perpetrating some favourite
vandalism.

While maintaining, then, that the views of Mr. Fergusson
and the ‘Quarterly Review’ as to the mode in which architec-
ture should be conducted, are impracticable, I must admit
that they are right in declaring the state of English archi-
tecture unsatisfactory. What are the causes ? By discover-
ing them we shall best know where to look for the remedy.

There is not less zeal or talent, less knowledge or
enthusiasm in those who practise architecture now than in
old times. Architects do fair work for their pay, quite as
much as engineers, surveyors, or stock-brokers, or even
painters or sculptors, and they are, I believe, as competent
at their work as other artists or authors. Consider,
however, the conditions under which architecture is prac-
tised. There is probably as large a proportion of bad poetry
and bad literature produced as of bad architecture. But
the bad books get buried in library shelves, or, reduced
again to pulp and made into clean paper, they cease to
trouble us. Only the selected books which have stood
the test of time remain, and from them our literature is
judged. Our painting we judge of by the pictures selected
for exhibitions, and happily never see the thousands rejected.
But no such selection is possible among buildings ; the bad
ones, equally with the good, continue to force themselves on
our notice, like vulgar tunes on a street grind-organ. And


--page 101

as our taste like our manners is formed by our surround-
ings, the evil tends to perpetuate itself, and every bad
building breeds more by corrupting the public taste. If the
art were in the condition it ought to be no bad buildings
at all should be produced. But the architect is exposed to
the same risk of error as one finding his way through a
pathless forest instead of along a beaten track. As we
cannot get rid of his productions, the freedom and indi-
vidualism, which is a characteristic of our modern archi-
tecture, is a far greater evil in it than in the other arts
and in literature.

Under the old system of architecture, when there was an
established style and manner of work, there was not the
same risk of individual error ; for, living in the age, they
could not help learning the style. Just as in social inter-
course those who are brought up in refined society acquire,
unconsciously, good manners. Some men have a power
of forming them for themselves. Carlyle says of Robert
Burns, when he came straight from the plough into the
society of Edinburgh, that high duchesses were charmed
with the manners of the man ; and what are good manners,
he asks, but the rules and refinements of intercourse, which
such men have invented for us. Without such an inheritance
of traditional manners, instilled into us from infancy so that
it becomes a part of ourselves, most men would have bad
manners or no manners at all ; but by the training of good
society, men who are naturally boors, may acquire and
practice a real refinement.

In architecture, as in every profession, there are in-
competent men without any natural gift for it. Apprenticed
to it young, before they know their own minds, they do not
care for it, but are unable to leave it : sometimes they even
come to believe in their own powers of design, and measure
the merit of their works by the uphill labour it has cost
them to produce them. Others have a power of composing


--page 102

bad things and of expressing their own vulgarity in their
architecture.

In architecture, under the old system, these men were
harmless. The first, instead of the inanities he now per-
petrates, reproduced the traditions he had learned, the
second was restrained in his vulgarity by the rules of the
prevailing style. And when that style, which was charac-
teristic of the time, was understood by every one, architects
who did not understand it had little chance of employment.

Employers judge by those things which they understand,
not by art considerations, for which they care nothing.
The architect makes a design good enough to please them,
or, perhaps, commits the matter to some clerk who, from
want of connection or lack of business pushing, has failed to
get jobs of his own. In the latter case, the result may be
satisfactory if the clerk can design, and is not thwarted by
the architect’s or his employer’s bad taste. But it would
probably be better for the art if those who could themselves
design had the responsibility of carrying out the buildings.
They are quite as likely to be honest as the mere business
man, and as competent for carrying on the work ; for the
old notion that poets and artists generally are imbeciles in
business matters has not been found to accord with fact.
Seeing then that individual talent and power of design is
so much more important in the present condition of architec-
ture than in old times, the greatest good which could befall
the art would be that those who have such powers should
get the opportunity of exercising them.

If architects would advise pupils, who show no capacity
or liking for the art, to give up the profession, the number
of bad buildings would be sensibly diminished ; and the
pupils’ lives would be happier by their taking to some
pursuit they cared for, before it was too late. The thing
to be desired is to utilise the designing power that is
born in the country. Any mechanical obstructions which


--page 103

hinder this are an injury to an art, the practice of which
should be as free as that of literature or painting.

No natural talent for design, however, will be of much
practical value without training, and for this there is
nothing better than the old system of apprenticeship. We
might, however, do something more than we do to secure
that those who are to practise the art are taught the
principles which the experience of mankind has discovered
and established. We cannot give the power of original
design to those who do not naturally possess it, but we
might help to establish a standard of taste which would
keep those who have no natural ability from common
blunders.

There is some truth in the Reviewer’s assertion that
the training of architects is too much at the desk among
drawings, and too little among actual buildings. Instead
of thinking out his buildings in brick and stone, and using
drawings as mere directions to workmen, he comes to look
on the making of drawings as the aim of the art, and un-
consciously thinks of building materials merely as a means
of imitating, as nearly as they are capable of, the effect he
has realised in the drawing. Where the design requires a
break he puts a half-brick projection, or a rain-water pipe,
which make quite a strong line in the drawing, but are
nothing; in the actual building;.

Old buildings appear strange and wrong when drawn out
accurately in elevation. Indeed, they must do so if they
look right in execution. There is a story of an architect
who lately restored an old church, and on being appealed to
by a well-known artist in the neighbourhood to spare the
quaint old tower, answered that it was true it looked well
in the landscape, but that if the artist would glance at an
accurate elevation of it he had made at his office he would
see what a ridiculous-looking thing it was. So the old
tower is now replaced by a very commonplace one, too


--page 104

weak to ring the bells in ; which, however, probably looks
well in drawing.

An architect sometimes deceives his employers and him-
self by making pretty effects in his drawings which he
cannot build. He is wise in his generation, for it is by the
drawing he is judged, and the execution of the work deter-
mined on. We wonder often what can be the meaning of
curious features in modern buildings, till we perceive that
they are abortive attempts to imitate, in unsuitable mate-
rials, some effect of cross-hatching. A reflection from some
irregular patches of glazed tiles on a wall we discover, on
examination, to be the only parts spared by London dirt of
an elaborate design of wall decoration, which must have
been the most conspicuous feature of the hatched drawing.
A dirty bullet sticking out on a wall was doubtless con-
ceived and drawn as a polished marble ball, giving a bright
point of light, and a long dark shadow on the wall. Or a
church, which in the drawing looked like a cathedral, turns
out, when built, like a toy church. There has been a
mistake in scale — you can put your hand on the top of the
nave piers.

The power of producing clever effects in cross-hatching is
therefore sometimes a snare to an architect. All that he
wants with drawing is accurately to convey his orders to
the workmen. This is all the Middle Age builders seem to
have had. Inigo Jones’ perspectives are very washed-out
and feeble-looking productions. Working drawings may
give no more idea of the finished building than a score of
music of the tune.

An architect, besides knowing his own profession, may
be skilled in painting or cross-hatching, as he may be able
to model in clay or play on the German flute. But these
are different faculties, and it is as unreasonable to require it
as a proof of an architect’s competence in his own art, or as
a condition in exhibited drawings that they should be done


--page 105

by the architect’s own hand — as it was stated the Royal
Academy proposed to do — as to judge a sculptor’s skill by
his capacity for copying his own statues in oil or water-
colour drawings. The picture of a building or a statue will
be best done by an artist whose natural mode of expression
is in drawing, not in stone and lime or clay and marble.

To hope, however, that architects should be judged by
their power of producing good architecture, and should get
work according to their capacity for doing it, would be to
expect too much from ordinary common sense. We might
hope for improvement in our architecture if there were
more general training in the art, and a better knowledge
of it such as a general interest in it would bring. It is
becoming a subject of interest to educated men, who are
eager to understand it if the confusion and the uncertainty
of its principles would admit.

For exciting this interest and inspiring a belief in the
reality of art and the duty of following it with truth and
earnestness we owe a debt of gratitude to Mr. Ruskin ; and
if, from the occasional impracticableness of his advice or
from ignorant attempts to carry it out, confusion and bad
art have been too often the immediate result, investigation
and discussion may in time clear away these errors, and
give the impetus a true direction.

Without an appreciation of the value of the art for its
own sake, and some real knowledge of it in the community,
we cannot hope to see much good architecture. Until this
comes about, architects will be selected for the qualities
which their employers can understand — energy and business
habits, the faculty of writing good letters, plausibility and
pleasing manners, and especially that power of inspiring
confidence which makes employers feel themselves safe in
following their advice and intrusting their purses in their
hands, and skill in getting work to do, which by no means
implies the power of doing it. Such faculties would find a


--page 106

more legitimate sphere in an agency for a life insurance
company, in pushing some new arcticle of commerce, or in
building and contracting rather than in art. In old times
the architect had nothing to do with the business arrange-
ments, he simply gave the designs and superintended the
work. This was possible, when the work was done not by
contract but by day’s wages ; and the system had the addi-
tional advantage of permitting improvements in the design
as the building was going on, evidences of which we find in
all old work. This is generally impracticable now; but
unquestionably we increase the difficulty of getting good
art by our system, which compels an architect, besides (or
instead of) being an artist, to be a sharp business man, and
selects him generally on that account. No doubt it is so in
other professions. Skill is presumed in doctors from their
having a carriage, or from a judicious manner, but to a
great extent the judgment of their own profession tends to
keep their reputation at its true level.

In painting, happily for it, the decision as to merit lies
with brother artists. A committee of painters decides what
pictures the English public shall be allowed to see, and
apportions their merits by their places on the walls ; but
in architecture judgment by the profession of each other’s
productions is impossible, partly because, since an architect
will undertake any amount of work, you may as well give
him the job as consult him as to rival architects ; but still
more, because from the variety of styles the art has no
recognised principles or standards of excellence.

It is governed, consequently, by amateur criticism, which
too readily recognises surface merits. Every one thinks
himself a critic in architecture with as good a right to his
opinion as anybody else ; especially if he has travelled on the
Continent, and knows the meaning of words like “distylar
in antis,” or “sexparite vaulting.” In music or painting,
those who know nothing are modest, and frankly confess that


--page 107

they do not pretend to be judges ; for there is a chance
they may be set down by some one who is an authority, or
by a reference to principles ; but in architecture, at present,
there are no authorities and no principles, so that a town
councillor or vestryman considers himself a judge.

Nor, though the principles of composition in sculpture
painting and architecture are essentially the same, is a
painter necessarily a judge of architecture unless he knows
its technical difficulties ; just as a good critic in painting
or etching, though he may not have mastered it, should
have tried it, to know when difficulties have been overcome,
and to appreciate the merit of what may look quite simple.
Do these arts, then, exist only for experts? By no means,
but no one can form a true judgment on them who cannot
see, beneath their surface, truth which lies deeper and will
last, and which the ignorant who do not see it at once
may in time come to appreciate.

When the public do not resign themselves into the hands
of an architect, but judge the productions of his art by their
own ideas of merit, as burial boards and chapel committees
attempt in competitions, they are sure to select the most
striking and flashy design as clever and original, while
those which are quiet and unobtrusive, whose beauty has
that strangeness which Bacon says all lasting beauty has at
first, are passed over. The ignorant prefer paintings crude
in colour to those toned into quiet harmony, and popular
airs to classical music. Fortunately they soon tire of the
popular air and discard it, and they tire also of the build-
ing which pleased them so much, but unhappily they
cannot pull it down. It must remain corrupting the public
taste through generations. Hence no architect who has
much self-respect will engage in a competition, unless either
he has friends in the committee who believe in him, or
the decision is referred to some one who understands the
subject. Usually, however, the selection of the architect is


--page 108

made, as in other professions, from his reputation, with the
same result as at the bar, of heaping so much work on a
few, that even with great ability and hard work they
cannot get through it without scamping. To make an
architectural reputation, very little art, and that rather of
an obvious kind, will suffice ; practical qualities and the
faculty of getting work are of more avail than the power
of doing it. A better knowledge of the art by the public
might give us some hope of better architecture. What
would give most hope would be for a country to return, if
it be possible, to a single style. There would then be some
chance of the art being generally understood. The attempts
of architects would not, as at present, so far outrun their
knowledge, and builders and workmen might possibly again
put good art unconsciously into their ordinary work.

During the last half century, since the Gothic revival
commenced, the difficulties of architecture have been
aggravated, by several different styles being practised at the
same time. It is like trying to speak three or four different
languages. Some men may express themselves correctly in
all, but the chances are in favour of bad grammar and
composition, and of a want of that mastery of the refine-
ments of language which makes the charm of good writing.
We have it is true in numberless books accurate records of
all the styles we practise — at the time when they were
universally current and understood — by which to form our
taste, but their quantity overpowers us ; it is more than we
can digest. Our buildings, therefore, are apt to be made
up of scraps of design badly put together. We cling
slavishly to precedent as our only security from error,
instead of the style being a part of ourselves and our
natural mode of expression.

Allowing — an enormous admission — that architects could
master all the different styles they practise, or supposing
that each architect only attempted one, yet the tradesman


--page 109

who comes across a new one at every new job has to
acquire fresh habits and modes of work, and, being taught
that his last methods in which he has been working are
wrong, gets a medley of them all into his head, which makes
it impossible for him ever to work correctly by himself in
any style again. As most of the ordinary building of the
country is done by tradesmen without the direction of
architects, the degradation of the art thus caused is serious.
The Gothic movement has now spread from the architects
to the builders ; villas made to sell and streets of small
suburban houses are being built everywhere in a style
meant to be Gothic, but with none of the characteristics
which made old Gothic beautiful, with only some of its
features, rendered absurd by the way they are used, like
the spurs and swallow-tailed coat which constituted the
whole of the King of Tahiti’s court dress.

Nor do the evil effects to the workman end here. The
characteristics of style must descend to the minutest
particulars to obtain work with refinement and harmony
in it. Thus the workman has lost the power the old work-
man had of doing good work without an architect; the
architect must furnish drawings for everything. The result
is as hurtful to the work as to the workman. No doubt
we may obtain harmony and correctness by drawings, but
only at the expense of interest and life. We lose what
gives the main charm to old Gothic buildings, and to old
Greek and Roman ones also — the impression on them of the
thought of a number of different minds working to one
end. Not that there is always a great variety of ideas in
these old buildings — the same ornaments are repeated a
hundred times — but, instead of as now being a lifeless copy
from a drawing, they are the expression of what had
become part of the workman’s nature, and have in them
something of his life. He understood it so well that he
could give it variety and interest without losing its meaning


--page 110

and idea. And if he had originality there was full free-
dom for the exercise of it. In these old Gothic buildings
the portals are crowded with saints, each under a canopy
typifying the new Jerusalem. Imagination ran wild in the
oak carving of the benches, and in the grotesques into
which the gargoyles, or stone water-spouts, were formed
(the action suited usually to their purpose in the building of
spewing water from their mouths). They were vulgar and
coarse no doubt sometimes, but full of human interest ; for
they expressed the minds and feelings of the carvers. And
this variety was obtained without the risk of losing
harmony, for only one style was known at the time in
which they could express themselves.

In old Greek architecture there is the same individual
life, not only in the higher sculpture, but in the repeated
ornament ; less wild, it is true, more under subjection to
law, but as different from the frozen regularity of our
imitation of it, as the leaves of a tree are from stamped-
leather ornaments. Each egg and dart is different from its
neighbour, each leaf has its own individual grace. And
so on old Greek vases the painting is as free as in any
Gothic work, not the stiff perfect thing we should imagine
from our copies of them. This power in the workman of
carrying out a design correctly in detail has only been lost
in our own day. Till the Gothic revival in the last century
he had his one style, which, though it might be dull and
unimaginative, he understood and could work in without
fear of going wrong. Now working one day at a Classic
building, the next at a Gothic one, his ideas are a confused
jumble, and he is unable to do anything of himself in the
smallest details without guidance. A church in Glasgow
of last century is a curious proof of this. It is a copy of
St. Martin’s-in-the-Fields in London, from Gibbs’ published
design, by a local carpenter, whose traditional knowledge
enabled him to carry out the style creditably in detail.


--page 111

The result is a correct though somewhat dull piece of
architecture. It would have been better if Gibbs had him-
self carried it out, but as a large proportion of the buildings
of the country have been and will continue to be carried
out by builders, and as, they are sure, if not as in this case
actually to copy an architect’s building, at least to follow
the fashion set them by architects, it would be an advantage
if both the builder and architect worked in the same style
so that the builder might copy with understanding.

Another evil resulting from the variety of styles leaving
the workman without any of his own is the increased
expense of producing work with any artistic character.
Formerly he put art into what he did unconsciously, carrying
out the traditions in which he had been trained. It was to
him the easiest and consequently the cheapest way. But
it takes far more time carefully to follow a drawing, and in
doing so he is always making mistakes : each new design is
like a new training; he never gets his hand in. Hence
the simplest and cheapest-looking piece of furniture from
an architect’s design costs more than an elaborate one
in a style the workman is used to, even leaving out of
account the remuneration of the architect.

In the mere architecture of our houses (in the limited sense
in which we usually employ the term as finished with the
plaster-work) we manage, by reducing it to its simplest ex-
pression, abstracting from it its life and spontaneity and not
trusting ourselves except in copying old ideas, to have
everything pretty well in keeping in whatever style we
work. But it is impossible, without an expenditure of time
and money such as few can afford, to carry the same har-
mony throughout the furniture and decorations, and without
this the house does not attempt to be a work of art. For
we are dependent on a host of different manufacturers for
carpets, paper-hangings, upholstery, chairs, tables, grates,
lamps, crockery, and the thousand and one things which


--page 112

make up the furnishing of a house ; and it is impossible that
these can be produced in variety sufficient to give a reason-
able choice in all the different styles we follow, especially
as what we can buy in shops is mostly bad in taste.

The only resource is to have everything made from special
designs, which is only rarely practicable and does not
necessarily guarantee success. Architects’ designs may give
us something like harmony and a relief from modern up-
holsterers' work in the last dregs of Louis Quatorze taste
with all its absurdity of illogical construction and none of
the grace which was its merit ; but they often, at least in
their first attempts, miss the first requisites of practicalness
and comfort. Chairs are so heavy that it takes two people
to lift them, or the carving and ornament, which looks
simple on paper, takes weeks of work, and does not tell
when executed. French architects, who are accustomed to
design the furniture for their houses, do not fall into these
errors ; and I have known British upholsterers get a
reputation for taste, and live for years on copying two or
three chairs from French architects’ designs that they had
picked up.

This harmony throughout, essential to a finished work of
art, has been attained in the building which, in spite of all
that has been said against it, is the most complete specimen
of the Gothic revival — the new Houses of Parliament.

Sir Charles Barry’s good taste could endure nothing out
of harmony, and from the bridge and terrace outside, the
architecture, carving, furniture, hangings, and stained glass,
down to the knives and spoons in the dining-room, and the
ash-holders in the smoking-room, everything is in the same
style. But it needed all his learning and correctness and
power of designing, with Pugin's marvellous faculty of
inventing ornament, working continuously at it for about
twenty years, to produce the result. What was done would
have been impossible, without practically unlimited draft


--page 113

on the nation’s purse. Yet it is not perfect ; notwith-
standing that a special army of workmen were trained for
it, there is a certain correctness and sameness in the carving
very different from the living irregularity that gives its
charm to old work ; the higher decoration of painting and
sculpture could not be brought under the influence of the
style, and is out of keeping and out of harmony.

If there was failure here, who can hope to succeed ? The
results of having no style of our own at present in architec-
ture are that, as a general rule, architects cannot understand
their art, and builders, who do most of the actual work,
can have no hope of doing so, that the public generally
are equally ignorant, that the workman is degraded into a
machine, that harmony in the furnishing is impossible,
and that the work is bad.

“If there be any condition,” says Mr. Ruskin, “which in
watching the progress of architecture, we see distinct and
general, . . . any one conclusion which may be constantly
drawn, it is this, that the architecture of a nation is great
only when it is as universal and established as its language,
and when provincial differences of style are nothing more
than so many dialects. . . . Other necessities are matters
of doubt. Nations have been alike successful in their
architecture in times of poverty and of wealth, in times of
barbarism and refinement ; . . . but this one condition has
been constant, this one requirement clear, in all places and
at all times, that the work shall be that of a {_school_}, that no
individual caprice shall dispense with, or materially vary,
accepted types and customary decorations ; that from the
cottage to the palace, and from the chapel to the basilica, . . .
every member and feature of the architecture of the nation
shall be as commonly current, as frankly accepted, as
its language or its coin. . . . We want no new style of
architecture. . . . But we must have some style. It is of
marvellously little importance, if we have a code of laws,


--page 114

and they be good laws, whether they be new or old, foreign
or native, Roman or Saxon, or Norman or English laws ;
but it is of considerable importance that we should have
a code of laws of one kind or another, and that code accepted
and enforced from one side of the island to another, and not
one law made ground of judgment at York, and another at
Exeter.”{^1} “I think all the arts will languish until architec-
ture takes the lead, and (this I don’t think, I proclaim as
confidently as I would assert the necessity, for the safety of
society, of an understood and strongly administered legal
government) our architecture will languish, and that in
the very dust, until the first principle of common sense be
manfully obeyed, and a universal system of form and work-
manship be everywhere adopted and enforced. It may be
said that this is impossible. It may be so — I fear it is so :
I have nothing to do with the impossibility of it ; I simply
know and assert the necessity of it. If it be impossible,
English art is impossible. Give it up at once. You are
wasting time and money and energy on it, and though you
exhaust centuries and treasuries, and break hearts for it, you
will never raise it above the merest dilettanteism. Think not
of it. It is a dangerous vanity, a mere gulf in which genius
after genius will be swallowed up, and it will not close.
And so it will continue to be unless the one bold and
broad step be taken at the beginning. We shall not
manufacture art out of pottery and printed stuffs; we
shall not reason art out by our philosophy; we shall not
stumble upon art by our experiments, nor create it by our
fancies : I do not say we can even build it out of brick and
stone ; but there is a chance for us in these, and there is
in none else ; and that chance rests on the bare possibility
of obtaining the consent, both of architects and of the
public, to choose a style, and to use it universally.”{^2}

{^1} Ruskin, ‘Lamp of Obedience,’ pp. 186, 187.

{^2} ‘Seven Lamps of Architecture,’ pp. 189, 190.


--page 115

But what style are we to choose ? It is now that the
real difficulty begins, for it is the difference of opinion on
this point, among men whose knowledge gives them a right
to have one, which is one main cause of the existing
confusion.

“Why not do without a style at all?” is one of the most
obvious and most frequently suggested answers ; “build
simply as our wants demand, and never mind style.” This
is precisely what we do to a melancholy extent in those
new manufacturing towns, utterly devoid of grace or beauty
or interest, though even in these dismal heaps of bricks and
slates there are still some traces of old style or methods
of work. Happily we cannot rest satisfied in this return to
barbarism. Then “let us be original, and make a new
style for ourselves.” It would be about as wise to say,
“Let us invent a new language.” At the shortest, the pro-
cess takes a century or two, even when it is only a change
or development of an older one.

There is an appearance of reason in imagining that we
might add to what we build for practical need some of the
qualities of beauty or grandeur enumerated in the last
chapter. But the progress of art ideas is inconceivably
slow. We have still in daily use forms of ornament
invented thousands of years ago ; and why not, if they suit
our purposeand , are better than we can invent ourselves ?

The problems involved in clothing the necessities of house-
construction in artistic forms have already been solved for
us, with a perfection of art from the accumulated thought of
centuries, compared with which any new attempts of ours
would be mere crudities. We need no new forms of
windows. For spanning spaces we cannot improve on the
arch and lintel; and any new form of mouldings we might
invent would most likely only be variations for the worse
from what we find ready to our hands. If we could divest
ourselves of our civilisation, of our power of construction


--page 116

and sense of beauty, we might, like the early Mediæval
builders, begin at the beginning again (though their
attempts, too, were copies of Roman buildings, but so bad
as to be original), and start the art anew on a fresh course.
But our knowledge of the purity and refinement of Greek
art, the nerve and poetry of Gothic, and the sumptuousness
of Roman and Renaissance, gives us ideas which we can
satisfy only by appropriating forms already perfected.

Consequently we must continue to copy ; our architecture
must be founded on some old style.

In this way former architectures have grown. Greece
got the first ideas of her art from Egypt and from Asia ;
Indian architecture is derived from Greek ; Romanesque,
Gothic, and Byzantine, from Roman. Copying is not
necessarily an evil, if only we compel ourselves to vary
from the standard when necessity requires. But it is not
easy to clothe such new requirements with the same beauty
as the old ; we are apt either to sacrifice our convenience to
the style, or to retain features which are useless, for their
beauty. If we can master some old style, so that we can
use it in spirit rather than in form, and can give artistic
expression to our new necessities in harmony with it, we
may hope in time to have a style of our own.

We must found on some old style, — which shall we
choose ? It is now that the real difficulty begins.

Mr. Fergusson, after describing and criticising the new
Federal Palace at Berne, a building in a round-arched
massive style with something of the character of Florentine
palaces, and contrasting it with our Houses of Parliament,
concludes : “A few years hence, few probably will dispute
that a simpler, a more massive, and more modern style,
would have been better suited for our Parliament Houses
than the one adopted ; whether it ought to be the one the
Swiss have employed is a question not so easily answered.
It seems, however, clear that they are nearer the truth than


--page 117

ourselves ; and with some modifications, their style might
be so adapted as to make it approach more nearly to what
is really right and truthful than anything we have yet seen
in modern times.”{^1}

On the other hand, Mr. Ruskin says : “I have said that it
was immaterial what style was adopted, so far as regards
the room for originality which its development would
admit. It is not so, however, when we take into considera-
tion the far more important questions of the facility of
adaptation to general purposes, and of the sympathy with
which this or that style would be popularly regarded. The
choice of Classical or Gothic, again using the latter term in
its broadest sense, may be questionable when it regards
some single and considerable public building ; but I cannot
conceive it questionable, for an instant, when it regards
modern uses in general ; I cannot conceive any architect
insane enough to project the vulgarisation of Greek archi-
tecture. Neither can it be rationally questionable whether
we should adopt Early or Late, Original or Derivative
Gothic. If the latter were chosen, it must be either some
impotent and ugly degradation, like our own Tudor, or else
a style whose grammatical laws it would be nearly impossible
to limit or arrange, like the French Flamboyant. We are
equally precluded from adopting styles essentially infantine
or barbarous, however Herculean in their infancy, or
majestic in their outlawry, such as our own Norman or the
Lombard Romanesque. The choice would lie, I think,
between four styles: 1. The Pisan Romanesque. 2. The
Early Gothic of the Western Italian Republics, advanced so
far and as fast as our art would enable us to the Gothic of
Giotto. 3. The Venetian Gothic in its purest development.
4. The English earliest Decorated. The most natural,
perhaps the safest choice, would be the last, well fenced
from chance of again stiffening into the Perpendicular ; and

{^1} ‘History oT Architecture,’ vol. iii. p. 367.


--page 118

perhaps enriched by some mingling of decorative elements
from the exquisite decorated Gothic of France, of which in
such cases it would be needful to accept some well-known
examples, as the north door of Rouen and the Church of
St. Urban’s at Troyes, for final and limiting authorities on
the side of decoration.”

These views as to the style we should adopt are suffi-
ciently antagonistic, and counsel and practice might be
quoted recommending others. The fact that there should
be any question as to the style we ought to adopt is in
itself an absurdity, parallel to that of the French Consti-
tution-mongers, who persuaded themselves that the estab-
lishment of monarchy or republic was to be determined
on the ground of the theoretical excellence and logical
symmetry of either system.

Clearly the question cannot be settled in Mr. Ruskin’s off-
hand way, by the mere expression of individual opinion and
liking. It is doubtful if any settlement is possible, any
more than if we attempted at this moment to fix the views
of the age on religion and philosophy. If it be possible,
such a settlement will be determined not by intrinsic merit,
but by the simple consideration whether any one style has
a chance of being generally adopted. The advantages of
adopting one and sticking to it would be so great that it
is at least worth while making the inquiry.

--figure 24.


--page 119

CHAPTER IV.

WHAT STYLE OF ARCHITECTURE IS MOST SUITABLE FOR OUR
HOUSES ?

{+IN+} the last chapter some of the inconveniences were
pointed out which arise from practising various styles of
architecture at the same time, such as the impossibility
of so many styles being understood either by architects
or by the public, and their consequent faultiness and
imperfection ; the waste of time and energy in teaching
workmen various ways of doing their work, and the im-
possibility of their learning any style so thoroughly as
to work without the direction of one who has studied old
styles, with the consequence of bad and ignorant work
when they are left alone (as in the great mass of common
building throughout the country must be the case) ; and
of spiritless accuracy, instead of the charm of intelligent
spontaneity when they are directed by an architect ; and,
in domestic architecture especially, the difficulty and great
expense of carrying any style consistently throughout the
whole decorations and furnishings of a house, consequent on
the necessity of getting every article specially made from


--page 120

special designs. So that it is only in the most expensive
houses, and but rarely in these, that there is the harmony
essential to a work of art.

But is it possible for us to confine ourselves to one style ?
Certainly no imperial enactment could make us do so, much
less any counsels or persuasions in books.

There are probably too many opposing modes of thought
at present for one style to be a suitable expression of them
all. Neither the social conditions nor the philosophy are
yet born which can bring unity into thought and into art.
Nor can we delay building our houses and cities till this
happens.

All the styles of the world are open for us to choose from.
They have all been studied, and we know something about
each. We have even built Chinese pagodas. Egyptian has
been attempted (in plaster) and Byzantine has its advocates.
We must go on building with good architecture or with bad
as we can get it, and each one will, as at present, adopt
whatever style his inclinations or those of his architect
dictate. It is also to be feared that the desire which
characterises our time for constant change and new fashions
may prevent us from continuing any style long enough to
let it fix its roots and grow naturally.

But an approach to unity of opinion and practice may be
helped by an examination of the different styles possible for
us with the view of determining which of them is, on the
whole, the most suitable for our houses. A knowledge of
what is possible in our circumstances may at least do some-
thing to prevent us spending thought and energy and
money uselessly in devious courses on isolated attempts
which can have no permanent influence on our general
architecture.

There are several practical limits to our freedom of choice.

In the first place, as unity of style in our architecture
is the object we are aiming at — that we may have some


--page 121

single one which might be generally adopted, the style we
fix on should not be strange and unfamiliar, but should
be intelligible to builders and workmen and to ordinary
people, otherwise its productions will not be good in point
of architecture, or, if they are, their merits will not be
understood.

The style we adopt should utilise the traditional habits
and modes of work in which workmen of all trades have
been trained ; it should not compel them to learn new ones,
which would require a new apprenticeship.

It should adopt the ordinary modes of construction
familiar in the building trades, provided they are not
vicious or bad.

It should express our present civilisation, our modern
feelings and ways of thinking. This does not necessarily
preclude the adoption of some old style of architecture.

Accurate mechanical finish is a characteristic of English
work and by many is looked on as fine art. Though it is
not so, it has its value and should be a characteristic of
our style.

We ought to be able to get furniture and fittings
manufactured in the usual way by ordinary workmen, if
not exactly of the usual designs, to harmonise with it.

To fulfil these conditions, any style must, Firstly, be
one at present generally practised and understood, or some
natural outgrowth or modification of it.

Secondly, It must be {_free_}, with power of change and
development ; neither so tied up with rules and precedents
that it cannot be adapted to the irregularity and multifarious
necessities of modern house-building, nor so logical and
perfect that any alteration will spoil it. It should be
capable of incorporating all sorts of materials, rude and
refined, and of adopting any mode of using them in
construction.


--page 122

Thirdly, Regarded from the point of view of art, it should
be such that the best art of our sculptors and painters may
find it a suitable home. If Architecture is again to have
these arts as her handmaids, she must rise to their level
and suit herself to their style.

Out of the multitude of the world’s styles the first
test reduces those possible for us to a very few. The
only styles which have been lately, or are at present
practised among us to any extent, are Greek, Gothic of
several dates, and various forms of the revived Roman or
Classical architecture.

I propose to examine in succession each of these styles
of architecture with the view of determining, if possible,
which of them best complies with these requirements and
is therefore best suited for use in our modern houses.

The only satisfactory mode of doing so is by giving
an account of each style, of its development and of the cir-
cumstances and necessities out of which it grew. We may,
then perhaps, judge how far any of them is likely to satisfy
our modern requirements in house building.

Independently of this more practical purpose, these styles
are so important in themselves, as they constitute a con-
siderable part of the mental development and history of
our race, that an investigation of them should be of interest
to all who care for art.


--page 123

CHAPTER V

GOTHIC ARCHITECTURE

OF the styles which I have enumerated as practised
among us, Gothic, especially in its highest and most
perfect development in the reigns of Henry III. and
Edward I., has had in late years the full tide of enthusiasm,
eloquence, and fashion in its favour.

In church-building it has had the field to itself, re-
producing and finding perfectly appropriate the forms and
arrangements of the thirteenth century ; and it is also
now generally adopted for those places of worship in which
preaching occupies a more prominent place, and in which con-
sequently a modification of the ancient form is necessary.

It does not follow, however, that because Gothic may be,
for several reasons, the most common style for our churches,
it is the most suitable for our houses. The wants to be
satisfied as well as our traditions in each case are very dif-
ferent. But in some respects a stronger claim can be made
for Gothic houses than even for churches. In churches a
Classic regularity and restraint is proper and fitting, while


--page 124

the freedom and pliability of Gothic make it specially
suitable for buildings like dwelling-houses, which must have
apartments of all sizes, and in which it is often convenient
to have various levels of floor and various sizes of win-
dows, and not to be tied down to the regularity of Classical
arrangement.

Gothic, too, was the natural growth of the country, and
suited to the climate. It was the art language of our
ancestors, always familiar to us in the village churches ; so
that when the Classic was worn out, men returned to it as
to an old friend absent only for a time. The romantic re-
vival, of which Sir Walter Scott was the prophet, and the
religious revival, which strove to bring the Church into
sympathy with a larger unity and a higher antiquity than
had been thought of since the Reformation, may have helped
to revive it ; but its principles once studied, it was found
more practical for our use than Italian porticoes, which were
no protection in a rainy climate and blocked out the window-
light of a dark one. So that men of common sense and
without enthusiasm adopted it.

So far as artistic merit was concerned, the dregs of the
Classic had no power to oppose it. It has an interest and
beauty of a kind that appeals to common men — the beauties
of tracery and carving, of stained glass and coloured tiles —
which do not need perpetually to lean on buildings in Italy
as the standards of excellence. The causes which produced
it gave rise also to a school of painting perfectly in harmony
with it, which absorbed much of the enthusiasm and talent
of the younger artists, and which, moreover, understood
and carried into practice the idea that painting is worthily
engaged in adorning the walls of buildings.

By the energy of Pugin mainly, in the first instance, a
class of workmen were trained capable of carrying out Gothic
designs, and of providing suitable decorations and furniture
—not masons and joiners merely, but carvers who could


--page 125

work out their own ideas. The forgotten arts of hammered
brass and iron, of encaustic tiles and stained glass, were
revived, and have now become flourishing trades.

To the Gothic revival is due the credit of giving a new
impetus to all the arts, and of letting men feel that art was
a subject not merely for a dilettante few, but in which every
one could take an interest. Although it has not conquered
the country, its influence has been everywhere felt. This,
however, has brought out prominently a weakness in it,
which was not developed while it was opposed. The style
is attempted now by architects who understand little about
it, and by common builders who understand nothing, who,
to buildings formed on the old Classic traditions, which still
rule the mass of the building trades, add stopt chamfers or
quatrefoils or pointed windows, producing a form of Gothic
without its spirit or its power. It is becoming vulgarised,
and, as a fashion of dress, when it finds its way down to the
lower strata of society, disgusts those who first adopted it, by
its travesty of the original form ; so, many of those who
were the most enthusiastic admirers and students of Gothic,
who understood its principles and practised it successfully,
are giving it up for domestic buildings

But the style is still largely employed, not only in
churches, but in civil and domestic buildings. The new Law
Courts in the Strand, one of the most important buildings
of this generation, are being built in it. Its influence on
modern architecture has been so great that, without a know-
ledge of the style, we should be ignorant of one of the most
important movements of our day in the province of art. I
shall therefore give an account of its rise and development,
of the circumstances out of which it sprung, and the principles
which determined its forms. Such an account must be to a
large extent theoretical, and its truth must be determined
by its being an adequate explanation of the facts. Any
views on such a well worn subject cannot be altogether


--page 126

original ; if they were I should have a strong suspicion of
their truth ; but I have ventured to give some theories and
explanations which, so far as I am aware, have not been
previously advanced.

England and France each developed their own forms of
Gothic architecture, similar advances being made inde-
pendently in both countries about the same time, as is the
case at present in astronomy and other sciences. The style
was imported into England, already somewhat advanced,
from France, and there, from the more logical character of
the people, less tolerant of compromise than ourselves, its
development can best be traced. It sprang from an imi-
tation of the buildings which the Romans during several
centuries of occupation, with their faculty of giving their
conquered provinces not only their language but their man-
ners, had left everywhere throughout Gaul, in their own
round-arched style, palaces, baths, aqueducts, bridges,
basilicas, and villas or country houses like villages, con-
sisting of straggling agglomerations of buildings one story
high connected by covered colonnades for country residence
and the cultivation of the soil. After a century or two
of pillaging excursions, the German barbarians settled in
the land. By the middle of the sixth century the Franks
had occupied the whole country except part of Languedoc
held by the Visigoths, the east held by the Burgundians,
and Brittany, which was not conquered. By these conquests
they lost the social organisation they had brought with
them. Ceasing to be a conquering army under a single
head, the habit which Caesar and Tacitus had observed in
their ancestors arose again among them, each tribe dwelling
apart, isolated from its neighbours by tracts of waste land.
Military chiefs became landed proprietors — heads of little
independent sovereignties uncontrolled by the central power.
Their companions in arms, almost their equals before, were
now their dependents. With their love of plunder and


--page 127

fighting, when there were no more villages and towns to
pillage, they took to fighting among themselves, and it
was some centuries before even the rude national unity of
feudalism became a fact as well as an idea.

In this anarchy the monasteries were the only refuge of
civilisation, preserving some traditions of Roman art and
order, and organising needful trades into guilds, a system
afterwards adopted in the towns when, in the beginning
of the tenth century, they began to recover their freedom.

When, with rising civilisation, churches or monasteries
and towns began to be built, architecture had to begin at the
beginning again. Roman buildings remained everywhere,
but no one knew how they had been constructed. The
people copied them in their new buildings as well as they
could, making up for miserable construction by lining them
inside with marble and gaudy painting.

When they began to build churches they attempted a
reproduction of the old basilicas, or halls for the administra-
tion of justice, the form already adopted for churches
and which they still retain — a large central nave or vessel,
with an aisle or passage along each side, about half the
width and height of the nave, opening into it through a
range of pillars supporting round arches, above which was
a range of windows called a clerestory, lighting the central
nave.{^1} At first, as they were unable from poverty and want
of skill to reproduce the Roman vaulting, the roofs were
wooden. But churches in those days, like theatres now,
were always being burnt, and attempts were made to make
the roofs as well as walls of incombustible material. In the
south of France this was attempted — without the use of wood
— by a plain waggon vault, as it is called, from being like
the cover of a long waggon stretched on half hoops. This

{^1} Basilica is a shortened form of {_στοιὰ βασιλική_}, {_porticus regia_}, or royal portico.
Originally an open court surrounded by arched colonnades. Trajan’s Column stood
in the centre of such a portico. In later times the court was roofed in, and became
the nave, the side colonnades the aisles.


--page 128

-- Note: Figures 25 and 26 share the same title in the original text:
-- "Round and Pointed Waggon Vaults."

--figure 25.
--figure 26. Round and pointed waggon vaults.

vault they covered with solid masonry in the ordinary form
of a roof (fig. 25). But for this a round arch was very
unsuitable ; a pointed one saved weight on the apex and had
less thrust (figs. 26 and 30). Wherever they got the idea,
whether out of their own heads, which is not impossible, or
through Venice from the East, where the pointed arch seems
to have been used con-
tinually since the time
of the Pyramids and Nine-
veh, it was almost imme-
diately adopted for vault-
ing. The arches opening between nave and aisles and
those of the windows were still round.

-- Note: Figures 27-29 share the same title in the original text:
-- "Round and Pointed Domes". Figure 27 is shown between Figure
-- 28 and 29.

--figure 28.
--figure 27. plan
--figure 29. Round and Pointed Domes

In another way the pointed arch was found advantageous.
Attempts, again from a desire for fire-proof construction,
were made to build domes. Gothic had once a chance of
becoming a domical style of architecture. If a square is
supported on four arches, and carries a dome (fig. 27, plan),
the bottom of the dome being quite inside the angle
pillars, must be supported from them by four spherical
triangles ({_a_} {_a_}, figs. 27, 28, and 29) whose points rest
each on one of the
pillars, and whose
upper edges form to-
gether the lowest ring
of the dome. These
triangles resting on
their points, their tops
a quarter of a circle,
their sides each half
of one of the supporting arches, are called pendentives,
from their hanging as it were in the air. Now if the
arches whose curves their sides follow are pointed (fig. 29),
the pendentive will be longer than if the arches were round,
and the projection being the same, will not slope so steeply


--page 129

forward ; while, if the arches are round, the top part of these
pendentives must project actually level. Consequently a
dome is more easily placed on pointed arches than on round.

Neither of these styles of Gothic was ever developed.
In them the windows and openings always remained round.
The domical style with the means at the command of the
builders was suited only for small churches, and could not
serve the needs of the great towns of the north. The style
with waggon vaults was suited only for the south, for
churches so constructed were difficult to light. To form an
abutment for the massive central vault the lower side aisles
had to be carried up to its springing, thus abolishing the
clerestory and preventing any light getting into the central
nave except from the side aisles, leaving the central vaults
dark caverns (fig. 30). Then the roofs all of stone did
not do. Water got through their upper surface, as will
happen, and filtered through
the solid roof in devious
courses, the place where it
appeared on the inside
giving no indication of the
position of the leak out-
side ; so that it was found
necessary, especially when
the vaulting became more
intricate in form, to make
it merely an inner ceiling,
protected outside by a
simple wooden-framed roof.{^1}

--figure 30. Church roofed with pointed waggon vault.

Gothic, as we know it, developed in the north of
France, in what was called the Royal Domain, comprising
Paris, Rheims, Amiens, &c.{^2} At first, their churches being

{^1} In Spain the roof over the vaulting continued to be made of stone.

-- Note: Original text has superscript 'e' for XIe and XVIe
{^2} Viollet-le-Duc, ‘Dictionnaire de l’Architecture Française du XIe au XVIe siècle,’
Paris, 1854, which gives an ingenious account of the history and meaning of Gothic
architecture.


--page 130

large, the builders confined their fireproof constructions to
the side-aisles, for they were unable to vault over the wider
central portion, nor could they afford to lose the range of
windows, or clerestory, as it is called, which lighted this
central part, by raising the side-aisles so as to make them
abutments to a waggon
vault. For this difficulty
they found in Roman
work a solution which
enabled them to vault
the central nave and yet
preserve the clerestory.
By dividing the con-
tinuous waggon vault of
the nave into square com-
partments, and running
another vault across
each compartment, so that the two vaults intersected, as the
Romans had done, they concentrated the thrust on the four
angles of the compartment, where it was abutted, at first
ineffectually by tall buttresses, but with larger experience
completely, being carried down to the ground by half an
arch above the aisle roofs, to which is given the name of
flying buttress. At the same time an arched space was left
clear in each compartment of the nave above the aisle roof
in which windows could be opened. These improvements
are shown in fig. 31. This form of vaulting is called
groining, in contradistinction to the continuous waggon
vault, as the masses of the vault are divided and joined
at a point like the limbs to the trunk in the human groin.

--figure 31. Groined vaulting.

This system of vaulting it was easy to apply either to
the nave, leaving the aisles with wooden roofs, or to the
aisles only with wooden roofed nave ; but to vault both
at the same time, using only the Roman round arch, was
a problem of some difficulty. For, if the width of the


--page 131

nave was taken as the size of the square of vaulting,
the vaults of the narrower aisles, springing from the
piers of the wider nave, become oblong in plan, the
arches across the aisles being only half the size of those
into the nave (fig. 31), and the vaults rising from these
lower arches to the higher ones having an awkward
domical appearance.

If, again, the aisle vaults, as well as those of the nave,
were made square in plan, each square of the nave corre-
sponding with two squares of the aisles on each side
(fig. 32), the thrust of the nave vault was brought on every
second pier only.

--figure 32. Vaulting square in plan

When semicircular arches only are
used, those across the diagonals of the
square of vaulting being larger and
higher than those of the sides of the
square, the windows under them cannot
be as high as the centre of the vault.
Light is thus lost, and a mass of dead wall is needed over
the clerestory windows to form a level bearing for the beams
of the roof above the central vault. In other positions,
also, the round arch was found awkward. Where the piers
were close together, as round the apse of a church, the
arches resting on them, had to he “stilted,” as it is called,
in order that their crowns might be on the same line as
those of the wider arches down the sides of the church ; that
is, they were perched on the top of straight piers, down
which their mouldings were continued to the line of the
capitals.

By the use of the pointed arch, all these difficulties were
got over. By means of it arches of different spans could be
made all the same height. By breaking the round arch
into two parts, attached by a point at the top, the arch could
be widened or narrowed like a pair of compasses, and by
adding to the length of the legs in the longer stretches,

--page 132

it could be kept the same height as in the narrower
stretches.

--figure 33. Vaults of nave oblong in plan.

In this way the determination to render churches fire-
proof by means of vaulting produced the pointed style of
architecture which we
call Gothic. In conse-
quence of being so con-
structed, our old cathe-
drals havebeen preserved
to us. Canterbury and
Chartres, in our own
time, Rheims in the six-
teenth century, have had
their wooden roofs which
covered the vaulting
destroyed by fire, with-
out injuring the build-
ings under them.

--figure 34. Vaults of nave oblong in plan.

For some time after
the discovery of the
pointed arch the width of the nave, as in fig. 32, continued
to be taken as the size of the square of vaulting, the
aisles also being vaulted in square compartments, two to
each square of the nave on each side. The defect of the
thrust of the nave vault coming on each
second pier only was partially obviated
by springing a subsidiary rib from the
intermediate pier, thus dividing the vault
into six parts, instead of four, whence
this method is called sexpartite vaulting
(fig. 32). Taking the width of the aisles
as the size of the square of vaulting, which the use of
the pointed arch rendered possible, obviated all difficulties
(figs. 33 and 34). The central nave vault became thereby
oblong, its length the width of the nave, its breadth the


--page 133

width of the aisles, and the arches across the nave twice the
span of those against the clerestory walls, which, springing
from the same piers as the nave arcade, were of the same
span. (Fig. 33.) The clerestory windows were raised to
the full height of the apex of the central vault, sometimes
even higher, and the thrust of the vault was equal on each
pier. Thus, by the use of the pointed arch the problems of
making both nave and
aisles fireproof by
vaulting, of bringing
the thrust of the
vault equally on every
pier, and of making
the vaults at the side
walls and across the
church as high as the
diagonal vaults, were
completely solved.

--figure 35. Round-headed window under pointed vault.

Even after the vaults
became pointed, the
windows under them
continued round-
headed in form. (Fig.
35.) But a round
arch under a pointed
one leaves a space
something like an
arrow-head in shape
between them, which it was soon seen could be made avail-
able as window. The shapes of the windows were therefore
made the same as that of the vaults, and the same form
was, from the principles of harmony, carried out every-
where throughout the building.

The development of the style was doubtless influenced
not only by the mechanical requirements of which we have


--page 134

traced the development, but by the sense of beauty in the
mind of its inventors, and by the environment in which
they found themselves placed. If, in the problem which
they had to solve, they had been guided purely by mathe-
matical principles, they would have found a more perfect
solution, not in the pointed but in the elliptical arch.
By means of it arches of different spans could have been
made to intersect with perfect mathematical accuracy
without recourse to the expedient which, in the light
of mathematics, is a clumsier one, of vaulting ribs. But
in the light of art the result would have been far less
beautiful, and even it they had possessed mathematical
knowledge sufficient for working out their problem by the
use of the elliptical arch, their instinct as artists would
have prevented them from adopting it. Besides this,
opportunity had made them acquainted with the pointed
arch. The Crusades had carried them to the East, which
was its birthplace, and where they would see it still in
use.


Sir Gilbert Scott, in his lectures on Mediaeval Archi-
tecture to the Students of the Royal Academy, opposes the
theory I have attempted to state, that the introduction of
the pointed arch was due to the necessities of vaulting.
Describing the difficulty of groining oblong bays, he says,{^1}
“The mathematical solution of the problem would have
been to make the section of the narrower vault an upright
{_semi-ellipse_}; but this does not appear to have been at any
period adopted, or, if at all, in exceptional cases only. The
pointed arch would have been an approximate expedient,
and its introduction has been very ingeniously attributed
to this difficulty — a theory to which I shall have again to
allude.” The architects of the south of France, he states
(page 58, vol. i.), adopted the pointed vault in their barrel

{^1} Vol. i. p. 57.


--page 135

vaults as having less outward thrust, “the same expedient
was now had recourse to for groined vaulting, the main arches
of which were, towards the middle of the twelth century,
changed from the semi-circle to the pointed arch.” “It
will be seen from the above” (he continues in page 61) “that
the pointed arch was not introduced into Mediæval structure
from mere caprice — merely from seeing it elsewhere, and
taking a fancy to its form — but from the necessities of con-
struction ; from its increased strength and diminished thrust.
It was used at first for the main arch only of the greater
vault. The same reason soon led to its introduction
wherever great weight was to be carried, as under towers,
etc.; but for all small arches the semi-circle was long re-
tained. I have alluded to the very beautiful theory that
it was introduced for the side arches of oblong groins,
simply as a means of obtaining arches of equal height,
with only half the span of those of the main vault.
True it is that, at a later date, it became most useful for
this purpose. But a careful study of the monuments, in
which it is first systematically used, clearly shows that
its introduction was from {_statical_}, and neither geometrical
nor merely æsthetical motives; for in the face of that
theory we find the narrower arch or wall-rib remaining
round, long after the wider arch had become pointed.
Such is the case in nearly all the earlier French transi-
tional churches, as at Noyon and at St. Germain des Pres,
and we see the same at Canterbury. In most of these
buildings the narrow arch is semi-circular and stilted,
and the crown of the cross vault raised, as before described,
thus losing a part of the clerestory wall, a disadvantage
obviated when the pointed arch became more frankly
acknowledged.”

But the theory of the adoption of the pointed arch in
vaulting, as I understand it and have attempted to state it,
is not as Sir Gilbert Scott here implies, that it was in order


--page 136

to make the narrow side arch of an oblong vault as high as
the wider cross arch. Where the pointed arch was de-
manded, in vaults whether square or oblong in plan, was
where it was first used, in the {_cross_} arches ; so that their
crown might be as high as that of the {_diagonal_} arches, and
the height of the church continuous along its length. As
the windows in the clerestory wall were small, there was no
need of increasing the height of the vault over them, and
the accustomed round form was continued, till a growing
sense of harmony made the wall vault also pointed. I
therefore think that though in vaults oblong in plan,
the smaller arch at the wall continued round after the
cross vault became pointed, this does not disprove the theory
that the use of the pointed arch was due to the constructive
necessities of vaulting. It solved the problem of making
the arches across the church as high as the diagonal arches
of the vault. Sir Gilbert Scott considers that the pointed
arch was adopted “from {_statical_}, and neither geometrical
nor merely gesthetical motives” (p. 61,vol. i.), as having
less outward thrust, the first situations in which it was used
being the wide spanning arches of vaulting, and the arches
carrying central towers and gables, and afterwards in the
wide arches of nave arcades (pp. 235-6, vol. i.). But, as a
matter of fact, geometrical reasons are stronger than statical,
for its adoption in the arches across the nave. Round
arches could be made to stand in this position, and did
stand, even with the rude building and imperfect buttress-
ing of the early architects, and they also carried securely
towers and gables. But only a pointed arch across the
church could have its crown as high as that of the diagonal
arch of the vault ; and, as the arches carrying towers and
gables were continuations of these cross arches, they were
naturally made of the same pointed form. The pointed
arch, therefore, was not necessary for statical reasons,
but it made the development of vaulting possible, and we


--page 137

may therefore conclude that its introduction was due to
this cause.

--figure 36. Groining without ribs.

A new impulse was given to the art of vaulting by the
invention of {+Vaulting-ribs+}. In Roman groining the angle
of the groin consists merely of a line formed by the inter-
section of the two vaults, and the same system is followed
in the earlier Romanesque buildings (see figs. 31 and 36).
This line looks poor and weak, the
vault seems to spring from a mere
point. In St. Mark’s, at Venice, the
intersecting angles of the vaults are
rounded to allow the coating of mosaic
to be carried over them. The Roman-
esque builders disliked the harshness
of square angles, and, in their desire
to obtain effect by ornament, worked
round moulding on the angles of their
buttresses, and they did the same on the
angles of intersection of the vaults (fig. 35) projecting
them from the surface in the form of ribs, which gave the
reality as well as the appearance of strength to the angles.

The use of these ribs did not at first alter the principle of
construction ; each layer of stones in the vault was sup-
ported as before by the layer below it. But it gave
facilities in construction unknown in Roman vaulting. In
it the forms of the angles of the groins are determined by
the junction of the {_surfaces_} of the crossing vaults. Where
vaults of different sizes cross each other, the line produced
by their meeting at the angle is curved, making a weak and
unpleasant-looking line. In Gothic vaulting the {_ribs_} de-
termine the lines of construction, they are the prominent
parts which give the appearance and effect to the archi-
tecture ; the surfaces are comparatively unobserved, they
may meet each other at any angle without detriment to the
appearance, the junction being concealed by the rib; and


--page 138

are sometimes twisted into forms like a ploughshare. By
the use of ribs vaults of irregular plan with arches of
different widths could be easily constructed, and be made
to look satisfactory.

As the style advanced, these ribs were increased in
number ; instead of appearing merely on the cross arches,
and the angles of the diagonal, the broad surfaces of the
vault were broken up first by one then by more ribs (see B
and C, fig. 45, p. 160). These additional ribs strengthened
the vault, the surfaces, or filling in between the ribs, could
be made thinner and the vault lighter, and consequently
have less thrust. Æsthetical considerations may also have
had some influence. The change was in harmony with
others in the architecture ; the surfaces of the windows also
were broken up by the bars of tracery.

As the style progressed, the introduction of vaulting ribs
changed the principle of construction in the vaulting. In-
stead of the vault being a broad arch surface, the ribs
became its bearing lines, a skeleton of curved beams, sup-
porting the surface of the vault, as iron beams support a
concrete floor. This surface or filling in was formed of
long stones or of flat arches, resting from rib to rib. In
Roman vaulting the surface is the vault. In Gothic vault-
ing we might remove the surface and the vault would
stand.

These ribs were made to spring each from a separate
slender column, one of a cluster. As the style developed
the columns and the vaulting ribs in late Gothic sometimes
coalesced, the capitals dividing them became absorbed, the
ribs rising without break from the base of the building to the
crown of the arch. The feeling of ascent and growth thus
given, with the branching groining ribs meeting overhead,
gave rise to the popular theory that Gothic architecture
sprang from an imitation of a forest with its spreading
branches. The history of the style proves the theory


--page 139

erroneous ; yet it is true that Gothic has in it something of
the spirit and growth of forest life, as Greek architecture
has sympathy with the higher forms of animal life.

The windows at first were small, leaving large surfaces
of wall to be decorated with colour and painting, and the
decoration was carried out over the windows also, by the
use of stained glass. This latter mode of decoration, once
introduced, was felt to be so brilliant and charming, that
henceforth it ruled the development of the style. The object
of every change was to reduce the surface of masonry,
and give more space for stained glass. The small windows
were put closer together, and the masonry between them
reduced to single upright bars of stone, called rnullions,
narrow on the face but deep across the plane of the
window, so as to give as much opening as possible for
glass, while retaining strength. Openings shaped like
flowers of three or four, or more leaves, were placed above
them ; the corners left between were pierced ; the stone
between these openings was reduced to bars bending round
the foliated forms (to which the name of tracery is given) ;
and thus at last one great window was formed, which filled
the whole space under the vault (fig. 35).

These mullioned and traceried windows are one of the
most charming features of Gothic architecture, so beautiful
in themselves that, like Greek porticos, they have been
used even when the causes which led to their adoption do
not exist. In large windows, however — especially when
these are used in the same building along with smaller ones
—a division of their surface by some such means must
always remain one of the simplest and most admirable
means of producing architectural effect. Windows of all
sizes can thus be brought into harmony with each other,
an immense advantage in domestic architecture. The
architecture of the walls is, as it were, carried over the
windows by bars of stone, giving them greater strength


--page 140

and solidity and interest, than if they remained mere great
holes in the wall.

The form of these stone bars will naturally partake of the
constructive lines of the architecture. Under vaultings
they will be curved, but when the architectural construction
is altogether in perpendicular and horizontal straight lines,
as in our ordinary domestic architecture, the straight form
which bars of stone naturally take will be simpler and
more suitable.


Gothic architecture had a magnificent opportunity of
development in the construction of the great cathedrals,
which, in France, were all built at the end of the twelfth
and beginning of the thirteenth centuries.

These were civil as well as ecclesiastical buildings; in
fact, the distinction between the two provinces was a thing
unknown at the time, and is wholly a modern idea, which
we never probably would have had, except for the dif-
ferences in religious belief which arose among us at the
Reformation. The State is merely the community acting
in combination for those purposes in which combined is
more convenient than individual action. With us its action
is now almost confined to justice, police, war, and possibly
education.{^1} When religious belief was uniform, as in the
Middle Ages, State action included religion. The bishops
and abbots were feudal barons, with civil jurisdiction ; and
all State action had some religious character and sanction.
The cathedrals were the great meeting-places of the city,
used for secular purposes, such as the administration of
justice, and even for histrionic performances{^2} (which, again
were religious in character), as well as for mass.

They sprung up just after the towns, along with the right
to have walls, had attained freedom and privileges, of which

{^1} This was written before the Elementary Education Act was passed.

{^2} Viollet-le-Duc, ‘Dictionnaire de l’Architecture’


--page 141

they remain the monuments ; and as rivals to the great
castles of the lay, and the monasteries of the religious
barons. The bishops and secular clergy went heartily with
the movement, which asserted for them the power and
importance which had been largely absorbed by the mo-
nasteries. All the important towns seemed seized with
a mania to rebuild their cathedrals with a magnificence pre-
viously unknown. The new architecture, taking nothing
for granted, governed only by logical necessities of con-
struction, is an expression of the rationalism of which
A belard sowed the seed in modern thought, though devoted,
like him, to the service of the Church. The architects
were laymen, for the most part, as in several instances
given by Viollet-le-Duc we know from their names, and
the representations which occur of some of them in the lay
dress. He states that the regular clergy — those living
under a rule, or monks, who had hitherto been the sole
depositaries of art and culture — disliked the movement. It
was natural that they should, for it meant that their use,
and consequently their importance, was gone ; and, after
pointed architecture was invented, they still continued to
practise their own old round-arched style.

This is the reason why the architecture of the French
cathedrals is in almost every instance pointed, while in
England it is generally round-arched. In France the
cathedrals were rebuilt in the new style. They were the
churches generally of the secular clergy, not of the religious
orders. In England, in accordance with our spirit of
compromise, our cathedrals were generally monasteries or
minsters also, and were built while the round-arched style
prevailed.

The main characteristics of Gothic are its system of pointed
vaulting and its traceried windows, filled with stained glass.
The former, in the course of development, led to other
peculiar features, such as the clusters of slender columns,


--page 142

each carrying a vaulting rib, by which the lines of the
ceiling were carried down to the floor, giving the feeling
of height and ascending growth; to harmonise with which,
and not from any necessities of structure or of climate,{^1} the
roofs were made steep and sharply pointed. The style
possessed also a beautiful and vigorous style of carving,
founded on natural foliage, and truthful and admirable
modes of metal work.

The change to copying natural foliage for architectural
ornament, instead of the carving of wild grotesques of the
earlier round-arched style, which the Benedictines of Cluny
carried to its greatest excess, is due not only to the decay
of barbarism, and the growth of civilisation and refinement,
but to the denunciations of St. Bernard. Preaching at
Vezelay, where we can still see them,{^2} “what business,” he
asked, “had these devils and monstrosities in Christian
churches, taking off the attention of the monks from their
prayers?” In the churches of the Cistercian order which
he founded, his puritanism forbad ornament altogether,
which does not, however, divest them of their art, but
produces the manliest and severest type of Gothic. When
the artistic genius of the people was untrammelled,
it produced the exuberance of decoration inspired by
the appreciation of the beauty of foliage, which usually
characterises the style.

This cathedral-building mania (which was really analogous
to the railway mania of our own day) lasted in France just
about eighty years, the cities then ceasing to find that their
privileges and the importance of the clergy (even of the
secular clergy) were identical. Strifes arose, the clergy
forbad the use of the cathedral bells for town meetings ;
the building impetus stopped before a single cathedral was

{^1} The climate of Switzerland is as severe as ours, yet the roofs of Swiss chalets
have a very flat pitch.

-- Note: original had "seulptures"
{^2} These old sculptures at Vezelay have lately been almost completely destroyed
by restoration.


--page 143

finished, and though parts have since been built, most of
them are unfinished, and not one has been completed
according to the original design.


The style thus developed was, of course, used for other
purposes than churches. The possibility of building in any
other style than the prevalent one, or even the existence of
any other, was inconceivable in times when Roman emperors
were represented sitting under pointed arches ; and scenes
of the New Testament were conceived of as transacted
in mediæval cities, by people dressed in mediæval costume.{^1}

Castles and houses were therefore built in Gothic, and
the mouldings and minor ornaments were the same as in
churches. Pointed windows and tracery, however, it was
found necessary from the first to modify ; while between
vaulted floors, when height was valuable, flat arches
segments of a circle, were adopted.

Very few specimens of Gothic houses remain anywhere.
During the Middle Ages the style of living was poor and
even miserable, as is proved by the general prevalence
of leprosy, testified to by the necessity everywhere felt of
establishing lazar houses. The disease has ceased in every
European country except Norway, in parts of which the
people are miserably fed.

The houses — except in the rich cities of Italy, one of
which, such as Venice, had the wealth and power of a
State like England — were generally poor and small. Many
of them were built of wood, and in the course of centuries
got out of repair; and almost everywhere the more
comfortable style of living in every class of society, which
the Revival brought with it, caused them to be rebuilt. In

{^1} One of the most curious instances of this dormancy of the historical faculty
occurs in a picture at Antwerp, of our Lord bearing His cross, in which the “stations”
are marked by the usual crosses. A Calvary without the “stations” was in-
conceivable.


--page 144

Nuremberg, though it possesses two noble Gothic churches,
there few of the houses are older than the sixteenth century.
Here and there in places whose prosperity had departed,

--figure 37. Romanesque house at Boppart on the Rhine.

and the people were too poor to rebuild, Gothic houses still
exist. One of the most important is the Goliath House, at
Ratisbon (shown in fig. 38) ; so called from the gigantic


--page 145

--figure 38. Goliath House, Ratisbon.


--page 146

--blank


--page 147

--blank


--page 148

--figure 39. Street in Ratisbon.


--page 149

representation of David and Goliath which remains on
its wall.{^1}

The drawing of a street at Ratisbon (fig. 39) gives an
idea of what a northern middle age city must have
looked like. Every important house had its tower to de-
fend it and to retire to in case of attack. In these houses
there is no attempt at symmetry or regularity ; the win-
dows are of any size required, and are placed wherever con-
venience dictates. The pointed arch is used consistently
throughout, the larger square windows being probably later
insertions.

But in the application of Gothic to house building from
the earliest period, the window openings were made square-
headed. Numerous instances occur, where under a pointed
arch the window openings are square. Sometimes the
pointed arch is purely ornamental, and carved on a simple
straight lintel.

The pointed windows in the old house at Boppart on the
Rhine (fig. 37, page 144), which appear to be a later altera-
tion of the original design, illustrate this. They probably
once had mullions.

The glass in houses was usually set in wooden frames so
as to open like shutters, and the architects were too sensible
to make these in a form so awkward for wood construction
as a pointed arch. These frames of glass were moveable,
and in royal progresses were sometimes removed with the
furniture from one residence to another.

Even when, in great halls built for civil and domestic
purposes, pointed vaults and pointed windows were used,
the lower lights, being arranged to open for air and
view, were always square-headed. The glass in the upper
lights was fixed, being let into grooves in the stone as
in church windows. In a house at Rheims, of which I give

{^1} Since this illustration was drawn the painting on the house has been restored,
and altered not only in colour but in form.


--page 150

a sketch (fig. 40), called the House of the Musicians (from
the statues in pointed arches between the windows, each
with a musical instrument), which was built between the
years 1240 and 1250, during the highest development of
the pointed style; while the pointed arch is used for all the
decorative features — such as the niches and the range of

--figure 40. House of the Musicians at Rheims.

little arches supporting the cornice — it is frankly abandoned
in the windows, where the form would not have been
practical. The same tendency to abandon the pointed arch
in domestic windows is found in England also, as may be
seen in the illustration of Markenfield Hall, near Ripon, in
Yorkshire (fig. 41), from Parker’s ‘English Domestic Archi-


--page 151

tecture of the Middle Ages,’ for the use of which I am
indebted to the kindness of Mr. James Parker.

It is situated in Yorkshire, about two miles west of
Ripon, and seems to me a charming example of an English
Gothic house. The licence to crenellate it was obtained in
1310, and it was probably commenced about that time.
The large traceried window in the view is the eastern
window of the chapel, which, as well as the great hall, is
on the upper story, in accordance with the custom of the

--figure 41. Markenfield Hall, Yorkshire.

fourteenth century. The windows to the right are those
of the Solar behind the dais of the hall. These are square-
headed, evidently made so from necessity, the floor above or
the ceiling not allowing space for an arch. Where there is
space, the windows are arched.{^1}


It may be urged against the statement that vaulting is
an essential of Gothic architecture, that Gothic churches,

{^1} Parker, quoting Mr. Twopenny. Vol. ii. p. 232.


--page 152

as well as domestic buildings, in England especially,
frequently had wooden ceilings, and this not always from
economy, but, even where, as in St. Stephen’s chapel at
Westminster, the wealth of English art was lavished.

This, however, does not disprove the fact that the pointed
style arose from necessities of vaulting ; and, indeed, to the
use of wooden roofs in England may, I think, be traced
the abandonment of the pointed arch, and the adoption
of the flattened perpendicular form : while in France, where
the use of the vaulting was continued, the pointed arch also
was retained to the last. The wooden ceiling left the walls
divided into square-headed spaces (instead of the arched

-- Note: Figures 42 & 43 share a title: "Under level cornice."

--figure 42. Decorated window
--figure 43. Perpendicular window

ones under the vaulting), which a pointed window could not
fill (fig. 42). The window arch formed, with the straight
level cornice, awkward corner spaces, called spandrils,
which there was always a difficulty to know what to do
with. So the haunches of the arch were raised, making
the window nearly square-headed, and adding the space occu-
pied by the spandril to the amount of stained glass (fig. 43).

The lines of the flattened arch were drawn in various
ways, usually from four centres. Sometimes the upper lines
which meet at the apex are quite straight, and in some
cases the spandrils disappear altogether. So by gradual
change the pointed arched window becomes a simple
square-headed window filled with tracery.


--page 153
--blank


--page 154

--figure 44. House of Jacques Cœur at Bourges.


--page 155

In every instance, in fact, in the history of the style in
which the use of pointed vaulting was given up, the aban-
donment of the pointed arch followed sooner or later.

I have stated that it was not from any necessities of
climate or construction that the roofs were made steep
pitched, but to harmonise with the tendency to height
and upward growth which was characteristic of the rest
of Gothic architecture. When in English Gothic the hori-
zontal cornice became predominant, and the arches became
flattened, the roofs, as we shall see, became flattened in
sympathy. In France the arches remained pointed, and
the roofs continued steep pitched. The tendency in the later
French Gothic was rather to increase their height. These
tall steep roofs became a feature of French architecture,
and continued to characterise it when the Gothic styles had
passed away, and had been superseded by the Classic.

The house of Jacques Cœur, at Bourges, illustrates this.
It was commenced in the middle of the fifteenth century (he
purchased the site in 1443), and is one of the most splendid
specimens which exist of Gothic domestic architecture. I
have given plans of the ground-floor and first-floor in the
sketch of the history of planning in Chapter I. vol. ii. p. 28,
figs. 139, 140. Fig. 44 shows part of the front, comprising
the main entrance, with the chapel over it, and the turret
which contains the stair leading to the chapel, carried up
into a tall stone roof like a spire. The chapel is vaulted
and its window is pointed. The other windows through-
out the building are square-headed.


Till the end of the thirteenth century the development of
Gothic architecture, as I have described it, was similar in
France, England, and Germany.

There are some slight national differences, but every
advance of the art was common to the civilisation of these
countries. It was even carried as far as Norway, where


--page 156

the Cathedral of Drontheim, built in the thirteenth cen-
tury, is in the ordinary style of the period. It is built
of stone, not in the national wooden construction which
the Norwegians did not abandon for ordinary churches.
But the style of their carving in wood, which has always
been a national art — prosecuted during the six months of
continual night in winter — became, and still continues,
thirteenth century Gothic in character.

This similarity of style in the different countries of
Europe was largely due to the organisation of the great
monastic orders, who sent missionaries to found new houses
and establish religion and civilisation in outlying districts,
as well as to the unity of the Church under the Pope. The
new inventions of architecture were carried everywhere, as
those of engineering are at the present day.


During the fourteenth century, when the style was esta-
blished, each country took it into its own hands and
developed it into a national style of its own. It is absurd
to call these later styles degraded, as has been the fashion
of late. Each of them, if studied without prejudice, will
be seen to have developed characteristic and interesting,
and often noble qualities of architecture.

One common quality they had, as compared with the
earlier style — greater lightness and elegance in construc-
tion, more window in proportion to wall, giving that effect
of space, and height, and light, in the interior, which is
the glory of Gothic.

This was attained by more scientific construction and
greater mechanical skill, which enabled the builders to dis-
pense with the masses of material necessary in the earlier
style. The interior of the church of St. Étienne du Mont
in Paris — a last expiring effort of Gothic — commenced in
1537, when Classic influence had begun to affect the forms
and details — exhibits the lightness and aspiration which


--page 157

are characteristic of the style more perfectly than purer
examples.

The same lightness and excellent construction is cha-
racteristic of German Gothic, and especially of our English
Perpendicular.

So far as practical convenience is concerned, one of these
great Perpendicular churches, unencumbered by massive
columns, with its feeling of space, is more suitable for
our congregational purposes, than those built in what is
considered the more perfect periods of Gothic.

The skill in mechanical construction made wonderful
feats of masonry a characteristic of these later styles.
Great pendants are suspended in a mysterious way from
the roofs. The stone is twisted about like willow wands.
The mouldings interpenetrate, the design disappearing
as if into the stone and coming out again. Great spires
are made of open lace work.

These later styles of France, England, and Germany, were
also characterised by a completeness in carrying out the
design which was sometimes lacking in the earlier style,
even, for instance, in the noble south porch of Chartres
Cathedral. But by continual slight improvements and
refinements roughnesses were toned down, and hitches
where parts did not fit perfectly together were removed, not
without some loss of the earlier strength and vigour.

In the tracery of the later styles there was also a common
character. As has been explained, tracery arose from com-
bining into one large window the narrow windows and the
trefoils and quatrefoils over them in the thin wall which
closed the space below the pointed vault. The effect of the
window depended on the disposition of these flower-shaped
piercings, which seen from the inside showed as forms of
light, from the outside as dark forms ; leaving between them
paces in the stone plate in which they were pierced, of any
shape that happened to turn out. The irregular shape of


--page 158

these stone interstices was felt to be an imperfection. The
development of tracery consisted in giving form and. beauty
of line to them as well as to the openings. In the windows
of St. Stephen’s Chapel, Westminster (fig. 42, page 152), this
attained equally for both. In the art of this period tracery
reached its highest perfection. But the process could not
stop, for growth is the condition of life, sometimes, as in
this case, of a life that had passed its prime and was drawing
on to decrepitude and death.

Attention was more and more given to the solids, instead
of the openings of the tracery. The stone was reduced to
regular bars, and the forms and dispositions of these became
the objects of design, producing what is called bar tracery,
as distinguished from the early form, which is called plate
tracery, from the openings being pierced in a plate of
stone.


But with these fundamental points of character in
common the later Gothic styles were strikingly different in
outward form and appearance. In French Gothic, as has
been stated, pointed vaults were retained, and the form of
the great windows, filling the wall space under these,
continued pointed.

In harmony with the curved forms of the arch, and in
the desire for increased softness and refinement of line, the
bars of the tracery were bent into curved flowing lines, like
the form of the flame of a torch, whence this kind of tracery
is called Flamboyant. The chapel of Jacques Cœur’s house,
at Bourges (fig. 44), illustrates these flowing lines of tracery
which are playfully formed at the top into a fleur-de-lis.

In the church of St. Eustache, in Paris, commenced in
1532, in the last stage of Gothic, when the Classic influence
had begun to prevail, the tracery of the windows is bent
into the shape of hearts and ovals. The softness and sweet-
ness of the flowing lines had begun to pall. In spasmodic


--page 159

efforts to avoid this, by producing new sensations, the
forms of the tracery became sometimes uncouth and ugly.

But in the glory of the stained glass, with which the
windows were filled, this was not marked. The buildings
were light and splendid, rich in delicate carving, relieved by
intervals of plain simple masonry which gave massiveness
and strength.


In English Gothic also, in the later decorated style
while it still retained the pointed arch, the forms of the
tracery were flowing, and the design often beautiful.
They never sunk to the degeneracy of the later French
and German. The latest Gothic of England took a
different direction. The explanation I have ventured to
suggest, that the arches became flattened as a consequence
of the adoption of wooden ceilings, is not disproved by the
fact that vaulted churches were built in which the vaults
were of the same flattened form. The vaults were flattened
to suit the windows. The architecture gave up the
tendency to curvature of line which marked the earlier
styles ; its masses and its lines were characterised through-
out by a squareness of form in sympathy with the shape
to which the windows were tending.

A peculiar character of the latest English Gothic is
the singular system of vaulting, found I believe, in no
other country, called from its resemblance to an open fan,
{_fan vaulting_}.

It is found usually in conjunction with the flattened arch,
and it has sometimes been imagined that the one feature
was dependent on the other, that the flat arch was the cause
of the fan vaulting, or the fan vaulting of the flat arch.
The former cannot be the case, for instances of fan vaulting
are found with sharp pointed arches, and we have seen that
the flat arch arose from a different cause. The principle
and origin of each are wholly independent.


--page 160

I venture to give an explanation of the principle and
origin of fan vaulting, which is so simple that it looks as if
it were true. My only doubt is that, so far as I am aware,
it is new.

I have already explained (page 138) how the broad
surfaces, or filling in of the vault (A, fig. 45), were divided
by intermediary ribs, first by a single one in each space
as at B, then by several as at C.

--figure 45. Plans of vaulting showing development.

It will be seen on the plan (B and C) that these ribs are all
of different lengths, that
they are like a badly shaped
fan. The angle rib looks
too prominent and awk-
ward ; the arrangement has
an incomplete and un-
finished appearance. This
is got over by making all
the ribs of the same length,
by cutting off their points
within the line of a quad-
rant as at D, thus making
a perfectly-shaped fan.

But this breaks the continuity of the diagonal arches
These fans or quadrants must tumble together unless the
diagonal arch is completed by a keystone or its equi-
valent. For this purpose a ring is dropt in at E, formed
of stones with radiated joints, which thus resist the inward
thrust.

This ring we might fill in with a flat stone, or we might
drop a pendant from it, like a stalactite from the roof of a
cave. The construction seems to suggest this — and it did
suggest it, as we know by innumerable examples.

The vaulting of the crossing of St. George’s Chapel at
Windsor (fig. 46) is a splendid example of fan vaulting.
The nearer bay shows another mode of breaking up the


--page 161

--figure 46. Vaulting of the crossing, St. George’S Chapel, Windsor.


--page 162
--blank


--page 163

surface of the vault, the ribs branching out as the spaces
between them widen with carved bosses at the junction.

I have said that fan vaulting was not caused by the low
Perpendicular arch, for it is found with sharp-pointed
arches. But it is clear that its adoption must have made it
more easy to vault with low flat arches, when the crown of
the vault was a flat stone or a descending pendant, instead
of an ascending point.


In the latest style of English Gothic the tracery of the
window heads ceased to flow, and became straightened into
upright bars, whence the style derives its name of Per-
pendicular. But, as expressing the true character of the
style, the name (like Gothic itself, ‘Queen Anne,’ and so
many others in architecture) is a misnomer. The main
lines of the style, as compared with those of any other style
of Gothic in England or elsewhere, and. the disposition of
masses which give it its character, are {_horizontal_}, in sympathy
with the level cornice which, I think, determined its origin.
Perpendicular architecture loses the tendency which every
other form of Gothic had to increase the height of the
building by high peaked roofs, which specially characterises
the contemporary styles in France, where the roofs (as we
have seen) became steeper than ever. The roofs are
flattened to a lower pitch than that of a Greek temple;
among the lines of the tracery straight horizontal bars are
introduced, the horizontality of which is strengthened by
treating them as cornices with miniature battlements (fig.
43, p. 152). The pointed windows in a tier one above the
other, in each bay, no longer lead the eye upward ; but,
square in form, they are massed close together in long-
horizontal lines of light. The belfries cease to be drawn
up into spires, and become square towers, finished at the
top with a level cornice and parapet. In domestic archi-
tecture the sweet low level lines of the Tudor house, in


--page 164

which the roof is often so low as to be concealed by the
parapet, are in direct contrast to the tall peaked roofs of
the French château of the same period, which still inherited
the Gothic principle of height. In Morton Hall (fig. 47),
the low-pitched roofs and long ranges of low lights exhibit
this tendency. If the name of the style is to be descriptive
of its character, it should be called the Horizontal variety
of Gothic, instead of ‘Perpendicular.’

It has been the fashion to abuse our English Perpendicular
churches, and much beautiful work in the style has in the
last few years been destroyed, though it had three centuries
of antiquity to boast of, because the clergyman or archi-
tect disliked it, and preferred a modern imitation of the
earlier style.{^1}

The dislike to Perpendicular architecture in which we
have all been trained has arisen, I believe, from our judging
it through the modern imitations of the last generation.
For a like reason it is perhaps possible the earlier styles
may find little favour with the coming generation. But
if we look at the Perpendicular style only in its genuine
productions we can appreciate its high artistic qualities.

{^1} It is dismal to think of the destruction of historical monuments of the last three
centuries, which the demon of “Restoration” has perpetrated in this generation.
Perpendicular windows everywhere have been destroyed, as in the great church at
Yarmouth, where some which contained old stained glass have been replaced by
modern ones. The outlines of churches which have been landmarks for centuries
(e.g., Durham Cathedral, and Jarrow Church) have almost everywhere been altered ;
the towers often swamped by tall new roofs of bright tiles with ornamental ridging,
replacing the old flat lead roofs, which, by the contrast, gave them presence and
dignity. Thus, every now and then some ignorant person, making the obvious
discovery that the beautiful Perpendicular porch in the centre arch of the front of
Peterborough Cathedral is not part of the original design, proposes to remove it.
This porch is an instance, among many, of the skill of the Perpendicular architects in
the disposition of the masses of their buildings so as to produce architectural effect.
Without it the look of size in the three great arches would be gone ; and it has been
most skilfully designed so as to hide the disagreeable effect of the middle arch being
the narrowest. At St. Albans the flat roof of oak and tiles, though the architect has
declared it can be made sound, is to be covered by a tall one of deal ; the object
apparently being to produce a steep gable at the west end, and so give an excuse
for a new front and the destruction of the great perpendicular west window.


--page 165

--figure 47. Morton Hall, Cheshire.


--page 166
--blank


--page 167

By its common sense and severity it saved English Gothic
from the looseness and degradation in striving after new
sensations into which Gothic fell in other countries.

So long, for instance, as the piercings were the guiding
features of the tracery, it was right that the form should be
foliated ; but when the bars of stone became predominant,
it was more in accordance with common sense that these
should be straight, than twisted and contorted into curves.

In few styles of architecture has there been a truer sense
of proportion, or greater skill in the disposition of the
masses. In the grandeur of its towers it is unsurpassed,
and the appearance of height in these is increased by the
low roofs and the prevalence of the horizontal line, for
which there is the authority of Greek architecture.


{+German Gothic+}. — One marked characteristic of the latest
German Gothic is skill in performing wonderful feats in
masonry. The art was in the hands of the masonic guilds,
whose members, clever and highly-trained workmen rather
than artists, thought the highest result attainable in archi-
tecture was to produce curiosities of workmanship, in forms
that seemed impossible in the material.

Great spires, as that of Freiburg, were constructed
wholly of open tracery. The plans of spires are sometimes
altered at each stage, so as to make difficulties, which skill
in construction might overcome. Wonderful double cork-
screw staircases, each twisting round the other, were made
in some spires ; and such feats were thought more of than
the outline. Mouldings were made to interpenetrate ; as for
instance, an octagon moulding on the base of a column
being made to look as if disappearing in a circular one,
and then show itself again. Some of the shrines in which
the Sacrament was kept are marvellous examples of this
laborious playfulness. They run up in tall pinnacles,
composed wholly of the most elaborate open work ; some-


--page 168

times they are made as if they had grown too tall for the
church, but the top, just before it strikes the ceiling, bends
and turns round into a crook.

In Germany, as in other countries, the tracery abandoned
geometric forms and became flowing in character like the
French flamboyant. A favourite form for filling the circle
at the head was one which may be made out in one of the
chapel windows of the Gothic house at Boppart (fig. 49,
page 176) in which the flowing lines form a figure like
tadpoles chasing one another.

The over sweetness and softness of the forms of flowing
tracery, which began after a time to be felt everywhere,
was counteracted in Germany, and a foil given by simply
breaking off the lines of the tracery and letting them end
in a broken stump, whence the variety is called Stump
Tracery.

In the fine {_Eckfenster_}, or corner-oriel, at Augsburg, fig. 48,
this kind of tracery is used as panel decoration, and also
to support the base of the window, where it takes the form
of intertwining branches. It looks almost as if its designers
had believed in the theory that this was the origin of
Gothic, and wished to illustrate it. The introduction of
such forms shows that no farther advances were to be made
in the style by legitimate methods — that it was becoming
worked out. It was a sign of old age, and showed that its
end was near. The term “degraded,” which is applied to
the style which produces them, is in a sense true. It has
not the simple and direct beauties of the earlier styles which
found a legitimate architectural effect in the necessities of
construction ; but its results are picturesque and interesting,
and often beautiful, and it produced noble buildings, of which
the nation is justly proud.

Such an explanation of the development of Gothic archi-
tecture as we have attempted to give, showing its principles,
and the purposes which it was created to serve, enables us

--page 169

--figure 48. Corner-oriel at Augsburg.


--page 170
--blank


--page 171

to form an opinion as to its suitableness for our domestic
architecture.

It disposes at once of several arguments against our
using Gothic. It has been asserted that the style is gloomy
and dark, and does not give sufficient light. Now, one
of its chief characteristics, as has been shown, is that it
is all window — that the main aim in its development was
to reduce the surface of the wall, and increase the space
for stained glass. No doubt old Gothic castles had little
window light, and this characteristic, adopted for pur-
poses of defence, has been sometimes foolishly copied in
modern Gothic houses ; but it was no essential of the
style.

It is called a barbarous product of the dark ages, when
the people were serfs ; and one of the means by which
a rich and powerful clergy kept them in ignorance and
darkness. On the contrary, it was the product of the re-
vived intelligence of the people, the outcome and sign of
their civil freedom ; and it gives evidence of a development
of art, of skill and refinement and grandeur in building,
such as we are incapable of furnishing.

It is said to be a style purely ecclesiastical ; it was just as
much civil. In fact, in its origin, it was the lay style of
architecture, as distinguished from the religious or monastic.{^1}
That the monastic buildings in England and Scotland are
frequently of pointed architecture, is due to the fact that
the development of the monastic system took place later with
us than in France, after the Gothic style was formed.

But is there anything in the Gothic style which makes
it (as is often asserted) more suitable than any other for our
modern houses ? For this it is not sufficient that it appears to
us more beautiful than any other. Our grandfathers thought
Greek porticoes so beautiful, that they were willing to block
up their window-light to have them. We see now that this

{^1} See the evidence given by M. Viollet-le-Duc, ‘Dictionnaire de l’Architecture.’


--page 172

practice was absurd (though Mr. Ayrton has repeated it in
his new Post Office) ; that it destroys not only the expres-
sion of truth in the houses, but the beauty of the portico,
by using it where it has no meaning. No architecture can
be satisfactory, even from an artistic point of view, whose
forms are not founded on use.

The Gothic system of vaulting does not suit our ordinary
domestic requirements. For great halls, where any amount
of height can be given, the height occupied by the pointed
vault is no disadvantage. But it is one, in a building divided
into stories, as our houses are ; and if in special building
we want fireproof construction, we can get it conveniently
and cheaply by means of iron and brick, or concrete, in the
usual thickness of a floor, without the loss of space which
would be involved between the springing of the vault and
a level floor over its crown.

In the modern revival of the style, however, in not one
in a hundred of our churches,{^1} and in houses still seldomer,
has any attempt been made to revive vaulting. It is there-
fore hardly necessary to urge that a thing is unsuitable for
us which we are never likely to use. Nor would the system
of vaulting by flat arches be tolerated by us inside our
houses. It would be thought prison-like and dismal, and,
from its expense, it could never come into general use.

From the example of the practice of mediæval architects
in domestic buildings, it is obvious that if we adopt Gothic
architecture for our houses now, we ought to dispense with
the use of the pointed arch.

Yet, as in all copying, it is the form, and not the spirit
of the original, which is apt to be retained, our architects

{^1} Modern French churches are often vaulted in stone; but even in restoring
ancient buildings it appears to be too expensive for our use. Sir Gilbert Scott, after
describing the vaulting of Nantwich Church in Cheshire, in his Lectures on Mediæval
Architecture (vol. ii. p. 212), says, “I am imitating this to a certain extent in timber
in the vaulting of the nave of Chester Cathedral, where, though the springers exist,
the vaulting has never been completed.”


--page 173

and builders think they are working in the Gothic style
when they put a pointed arch where it is not wanted,
and means nothing — possibly an arch one brick thick on
the face of a wall, supported by a wooden lintel inside —
while the whole construction and details of the house follow
the ordinary Classic traditions.

Old Gothic attempted honestly and fearlessly whatever
use or necessity dictated. It has always the merit of truth-
ful and apparent construction. But this to some extent
unfits the style for modern use. It involves, unless when
money could be lavished in decoration, an appearance of
severity which does not accord with our modern feelings,
and is least appreciated by the poorer and less educated, in
whose houses, did we attempt really to carry out the prin-
ciples of the style, it would be thoroughly disliked. Even
in houses where no expense is spared, we should not like
the appearance, however truthful it might be, of stone
arches inside our rooms.

Moreover truthfulness of construction cannot be classed
among the excellences of modern Gothic. The copiers of
the style, after the manner of copyists, are very apt in
their zeal for the form to neglect the spirit. Few better
illustrations of this could be given than the polished oak
boxes given as wedding presents, with magnificent brass
hinges meandering over them, which make it seem as if no
amount of wear or ill-usage could separate the lid. Un-
fortunately, those great hinges have no joint; the work is
done by a little feeble one, which it is attempted to conceal,
fastened by two minute screw-nails ; so that, with all its
appearance of massive strength, the lid could be prised open
with a penknife. Of course a hinge is stronger if the tail is
well fastened to the wood, and the old architects spread the
hinges all over their church doors, in all sorts of playful,
twisted forms ; but they were always the strengthening of
a real hinge. So different is the modern Gothic practice of


--page 174

ornamental door hinges, that the workmen’s ordinary name
for them is “the shams.”

Again, why should Gothic grates have “fire dogs”?
Before the forests were cut down, when people burnt wood,
they were necessary in the great old open hearths, for
resting the logs on, to let air under them to keep them
burning ; but it is sham Gothic to stick them on a grate
for burning coals. And why should our gasaliers be made
like the old coronas? These were great rings or hoops,
suspended from the ceiling, with candles stuck round the
circle. When the gasalier is very large, and the lights
numerous, this may still be a convenient arrangement for
gas-lights; but in a four-light dining-room gasalier, the
brass hoop is perfectly useless, and it obstructs a great deal
of light. Such a design, though a revival of a Gothic form,
is contrary to the spirit of the style.

It is seldom that architecture has founded itself strictly
on constructive necessities, using only such ornament as
grew naturally out of the construction and thus explained
and enforced it. The human mind moves so slowly, and
clings to old habits so long, that for centuries after a nation
has given up wood construction, we find it copying wooden
forms in stone buildings. In the gateways of Hindoo Topes,
of one of which there is a reproduction in the South
Kensington Museum, enormous trouble and expense has
been taken to procure posts and cross-bars of stones like
long logs of wood ; and of course the nail-heads, which in
wooden construction fastened the logs, are carefully carved
in the stone. Even in Greek architecture, the triglyphs
which divide the frieze into spaces are said to be the remi-
niscence of the notched ends of the wooden beams of the
roof. The decoration of Roman architecture has nothing
to do with its construction, but is the artistic expression of
a wholly different one. In fact, the history of all arts and
ornament consists very much in tracing ornamental forms


--page 175

back to some long-forgotten use which gave rise to them.
Illustrations without end might be given, but the following
are as good as any. The holes arranged in waves and
zigzags on the toe-caps of shooting-boots are a reminiscence
of the old Highland brogues of untanned leather, which
allowed the water to soak through them, and consequently
had to be provided with little holes at the toes, where it
squirted out again with the pressure of each step. Again,
the bands on the backs of books have similarly now no
constructive use, except in some of the best-bound books,
in which they still cover the cords to which the pages are
sewed. Such features in an art are not unnatural ; on the
contrary they are analogous to the imperfectly developed
organs of animals, which performed functions in the
ancestors of the species, now superseded from change of
habit, and development of the organism.

In the later stages of Gothic architecture the same
tendency shows itself. The Gothic house at Boppart,
illustrated on the next page, shows a common mode of forti-
fying mediæval houses, by projecting turrets at the angles
hung out on corbels, with openings at the bottom, from
which stones and molten lead could be thrown down on
assailants.

In the Nassauer House, at Nuremberg (fig. 50), there are
similar turrets at the angles, which are useless for defence.
They have no openings at the bottom through which missiles
might be hurled. Nor do they fulfil any other purpose of
use or convenience. They are purely ornamental ; but I
feel thankful to the architect for putting them there. Their
beauty, and the character they give to the building, is to me
sufficient justification for their existence.

Modern Gothic shows the same tendency. In the new
Gothic Hotel at St. Pan eras Station, which is a splendid
example of the style, it cannot be said that the specially
Gothic features, such as the pointed windows filled with


--page 176

--figure 49. Gothic house at Boppart on the Rhine.

tracery, are the outcome of any modern hotel requirements.
Pointed windows are inconvenient for blinds and curtains
and reduce the light at the top where it is of most value
for lighting the room. The tracery still further obstructs


--page 177

--figure 50. The Nassauer House at Nuremberg.


--page 178
--blank


--page 179

it, and it is scarcely sufficient justification for it that the
circles in it are utilised as ventilators.

The beauty of the architecture may be sufficient com-
pensation for the inconvenience and expense which the use
of the style involves, but when applied to modern domestic
use it has not the justification which has been claimed
for it, that its features are the outcome of use and con-
venience.

To the earlier development of the old Gothic architecture
belongs the almost singular merit of perfect truthfulness.
When a form ceased to have meaning, it was frankly given
up ; people did not, as in most other styles, weakly cling
to the dead carcass. Instead of the ignorance and
darkness usually attributed to the Middle Ages, there
is a freshness and independence of thought rare in the
history of humanity, and a wealth of artistic conception
employed in making every new necessity beautiful, which
few races have possessed. If we could but do likewise, the
result of working on the principles of Gothic architecture
would be something very different from pointed Gothic.
We should have no pointed windows, and quatrefoils, and
buttresses which receive no thrust. We should not have
in stone-work chamfer-stops, at the angles of windows,
simulating wooden framed work ; and all sorts of ugly
and unmeaning notchings ; and roofs so steep, that they
endanger men’s lives.{^1} We should ruthlessly abandon
unsuitable forms, not developed by our modern neces-
sities, even though we admire them for their beauty.
Can it be said that the Gothic revival has exhibited
these signs of the true Gothic spirit? On the whole,
certainly not ; and we fear that such vices as appear
in it are almost inseparable from the attempt to apply
a thirteenth-century style to nineteenth-century use ; that

{^1} In old buildings these steep roofs had usually a parapet at the cornice, which
saved any workman, slipping on them, from falling over the wall.


--page 180

the Gothic style is, in fact, {_the artistic expression of an obsolete
mode of construction_}.

As a matter of fact the attempt to introduce Gothic as
the style for our domestic architecture has failed. The
instances in which there has been any serious endeavour to
build Gothic houses have been rare, and in these the style
has shown itself as an external application of ornament
not demanded by the necessities of convenience and con-
struction. Under a pointed vault a pointed arch gives
more light, but under a level ceiling it diminishes the
light where it is of most value for lighting the room, not only
by cutting away the corners at the top of the window and
leaving useless spandrils (fig. 42 page 152), but by filling the
window head with stone tracery, which not only blocks out
light but is inconvenient for opening, and unsuitable for
roller blinds. Hence pointed windows are not insisted on
in modern Gothic, and when they are gone there is not
much of the style left ; for, in the mode of construction
and the internal fittings of houses, the Gothic revival has
had little or no influence. In most Gothic parsonages and
mansions (except in some rare instances where the funds at
command have permitted the expense of vaulted halls),
walls and roofs, ceilings, floors, and windows are made in
the ordinary way. Sometimes the architect, aiming at
perfect truthfulness of construction, has left the brick-work
unplastered, though that was not the practice in old Gothic ;
or has omitted the plaster ceiling of the rooms, leaving the
joists visible, or substituting wooden boarding instead,
making the floor less sound proof, and greatly increasing the
risk from fire. But usually the common traditional construc-
tion is adopted, with Gothic details and ornament, wherever
is opportunity of using them. These opportunities are rare ;
for the peculiarities of Gothic detail spring from stone con-
struction, and it is difficult to express them in the wood and
plaster fittings of our modern houses.


--page 181

Plaster cornices and ornament, which give an air of
finish to our commonest modern houses, were unknown in
Gothic, as was also the modern system of wood panelling
in doors and shutters, till the style had passed into its
later forms. The Perpendicular style ornamented the sur-
face of panels with patterns like folds of linen, but this was
too expensive for common use. The modern system of
ornamenting panels by moulded slips of wood planted
round the edge grew up under Classic influence and
took Classic forms, and its use takes away the Gothic
character from the house. For churches and for the out-
side doors of halls the panelling could be dispensed with.
These might be made simply of planks or boards, and hung
like old Gothic ones on iron hooks fixed in the stone. But
the better fitting, and the avoidance of warping and
shrinking which panelling secures, could not be dispensed
with for inside work. It was consequently used without
mouldings, the edges of the styles or framework in which
it was fixed being merely chamfered. Hence arises an
appearance of coarseness and poverty in the interiors of
modern Gothic houses, a want of finish, which even the
cheaper Classic houses possess.

Our common sash windows, which open by the two
sashes hung by cords and weights sliding one past the
other, have proved a difficulty to modern Gothic, never
rightly got over. This kind of window, which came to us,
I believe, with Dutch William, is now a part of our English
constitution, and, during the thirty years of the Gothic
revival, architects have been trying to work it into the
style. It was absurd in a pointed window to let the top sash
down, for a pointed frame was an awkward shape to fit, and
the air space left when the sash was pulled down was of a
most unconstructional form for wood-work, something like
an arrow head. Sometimes no attempt was made to fit it
to the pointed forms. It was set well back from the face of


--page 182

the wall, and the Gothic shaft and tracery put in front of it
for ornament, like the Classic porticos in last century houses.
Sometimes it was kept close to the tracery, a stone transom
concealing the meeting-bars of the stone sashes. In this case
the different planes of the upper and lower sash gave an
awkward look, which was got over by making the sashes
half or a third of the usual thickness, of seasoned oak. But
these attempts only prove that to use sliding sash windows
simply and honestly makes the architecture something else
than Gothic.

So far, therefore, as truth in architecture is concerned,
we are forced to admit that Gothic architecture, however
beautiful it may be, is not the outcome of our modern
habits and requirements, nor of the traditions and modes of
work of our workmen. These are practically unaffected by
the thirty years’ crusade waged by our best writers and
architects and the highest culture at the universities,
supported by the country’s wealth. It seemed at one time
as if the best talent in painting and sculpture had ranged
itself on the side of Gothic. Beauties, which for three
centuries had been unnoticed, were found in the painting of
the schools before the time of Raphael. Sculptors tried to
forget what the Greeks had done, and saw, behind the
imperfect forms of mediaeval sculpture, the intensity and
earnestness which breathed through them.

In poetry the subject which fired genius was King
Arthur’s round table and the deeds of his knights, as they
were seen reflected in mediaeval tales.

The wave has gone back, but it has quickened and
revivified art, making it a matter of interest to every one,
not a dead body of Classic rules, interesting only to the
learned. Sculptors have returned to their allegiance to
Greek forms. Pre-Raphaelite pictures are no longer painted.
The great masters of the Renaissance are again the highest
models. But the artists see with their own eyes, as they


--page 183

would not have done if they had not worked in the same
school as that from which the Renaissance painters sprung.

In domestic architecture the tide is turning. Since I
wrote these sentences six years ago, the change in feeling
has been rapid. But we cannot go back to the dead Classic,
from which Gothic was a reaction. The spirit and life
which it has left us need freer forms for their expression.

I say nothing here about the architecture of churches.
Gothic may still be the best expression of their purposes,
since it was developed in building them. If so, the
problem is not solved of finding a style which, like old ones,
might be universal. Architecture cannot reach its highest
development in merely utilitarian buildings, when it lacks
the force of religious enthusiasm. But the practical evil
of having separate styles for churches and for houses is not
serious. Gothic has not failed in churches, for it has perfect
models to follow, and no new wants to satisfy.

Churches too are simpler in their purposes, and can more
easily be superintended throughout by an architect. In the
greater number of our houses we are dependent on the work-
man ; his ideas and capacities must in many points limit our
art. To get art on these terms in our houses is an advance
and a gain, for hitherto our houses, unlike churches, have
been almost wholly outside its domain.

What little influence Gothic has had on ordinary house
architecture has been deleterious. When set free from the
well established laws which regulate it in churches, it lends
itself with fatal facility to the expression of ignorance and
ostentation, and, instead of architecture governed by beauty
and refinement, produces masses of crude forms inspired
only by unrest, loudness, and vulgarity. Better far the
monotony of Gower Street. That at least does not cry
out continually, “Come look at me.” If it is dull it is at
least quiet and unobtrusive. If not clever it is sensible
and practical, for the workmen understood what they were


--page 184

doing. It is plain prose, while “fast” Gothic is hysteri-
cal sensational poetry, bristling with vulgarity and had
grammar. It is not understood by those who have to work
in it, and the more it spreads the more is this apparent.
After thirty years of careful tending the plant has not
taken root in the soil.

--figure 51. Hohenzollern.


