--page 185


CHAPTER VI.


GREEK ARCHITECTURE.


{+Among+} the styles of architecture which remain after
eliminating all which were unsuitable for our use,
as neither understood nor practised, we included Greek.

Till lately Greek architecture was unknown. It was
known that Greek buildings existed, but they were in-
cluded along with Roman ones under the general designation
of “Classic.” The publication in the end of last century, of
Stuart and Revett’s careful measurements and delineations
of Greek buildings, in their ‘Antiquities of Athens,’ made
evident the great divergence in form, and the essential
difference in spirit between the two styles of architecture,
and the immense superiority in beauty of line of the
mouldings and ornament and refinement of the Greek, of
which it was seen that the Roman was only a bad copy.
Our possession of the Elgin Marbles created an enthusiasm
for Greek art, and about 'fifty years ago every new building
of importance was designed in the style. The most notable
attempts are St. Pancras Church ; the unfinished National


--page 186

Monument at Edinburgh, and St. George’s Hall at Liver-
pool. But the influence of the style permeated all archi-
tecture, and in every builder’s house of the period we find

attempts at Greek mouldings
in the wooden doors, and
enfeebled copies of the orna-
ments of the Parthenon in the
plaster work.

Greek architecture grew in
building temples. These con-
sisted of an enclosed shrine,
the dwelling of the god — the
naos or temple proper — and
porticos or sheds surround-
ing it, for the accommodation
of the worshippers, formed by
prolonging the temple roof
beyond the walls and sup-
porting it on columns. As
these porticos were the visible
part of the building, they
determined the nature of
Greek architecture, which
consisted of stone columns
supporting a roof, on which rested the architrave, great
stone lintels from column to column. On it were placed
the beams of the roof. The triglyphs with their notched
ends (fig. 52) are said to be a reminiscence in the stone
construction of the older wooden beams. These with the
spaces between them, which were generally ornamented with
sculpture in relief, are called the frieze ; above them is
the cornice, the crowning member, projected to throw off
the wet, the raindrops hanging from its underside, being
still represented, petrified into stone.

The ground idea of Greek architecture is weight ade-



Fig. 52. GRECIAN DORIC.— TEMPLE OF
THESEUS, ATHENS.


--page 187

quately supported. It is a very simple idea. Some, like
Mr. Ruskin and Mr. William Morris, hardly allow it to
be architecture at all. A child or a savage can set up
two stones and rest a third on the top of them. This
primitive idea the Greeks held to with religious venera-
tion, retaining every traditional form of it as sacred,
even copying in stone the ends
of the wooden beams of the
earlier temples. This gives no
ground for imagining as is some-
times done that the columns and
lintels were once of wood. One
may have a roof of wood on a
stone building, and the form of
the Doric column is certainly a
tradition of ruder stone form.

The square stone slab or abacus,
resting on the capital, is no imita-
tion of anything wooden. Its
earliest examples are the most
massive, and they would not have
been so had they been imitations
of wooden buildings. The Ionic
capital perhaps suggests a wooden
origin ; a corbel with its ends rounded, set across a post
to receive the lintel (fig. 54).

In Greek architecture there are three orders : the Doric,
the Ionic, and the Corinthian.

The Doric (figs. 52, 53) was simple and massive, but, on
account of its simplicity of form, it exhibits all the more
clearly the proportion between the weight and its supports,
which is perfectly adjusted. In the Parthenon the lines of
every part are drawn with exquisite delicacy and refinement.
None are quite straight, but all, not merely the columns



PTTTT’f "tr m Tr"'""R



O J £ vViT I SC.


Fig. 53. GRECIAN DORIC.— TEMPLE
OF APOLLO AT DELOS.


--page 188

but the walls and the steps, are gentle curves. There is no
ornament in the architecture; nothing to interrupt the idea
of great stones, each doing its work of supporting or being
supported. Everything that might be called ornament is
with a view to this end. The building stands on a platform
of three steps so solid looking that the columns require no
bases. The capitals are mere projections, their delicate
curves indicating support of the mass above them. Their
entases and flutings give them grace and ease in supporting
the weight of the architrave, which remains merely a square
stone. The triglyphs and the guttce, or petrified raindrops,
indicate the downward pressure of the entablature.

The temple at Paestum in the Greek colony of Magna
Grgecia, fig. 20, p. 56, is a magnificent specimen of the order.
Whether because it is provincial work ; or, possibly, because
it is of earlier date, the style is ruder than at Athens ;
the capitals are more massive and have less refinement of
line, but this does not detract from the grandeur of the
architecture.

The Ionic (figs. 54 and 55) was lighter and more graceful
in its proportions than the Doric, having the same relation
to it in its proportions as a woman to a man. There is no
doubt that, as its name implies, it is Asiatic in its origin,
and that the spiral corners of the capital are a tradition
of architectural forms of the ancient Asiatic monarchies.
Representations of rude Ionic capitals are found in the
Assyrian sculptures ; and in ancient Persian architecture
the capitals have Ionic volutes placed not across the top,
but attached perpendicularly to the side. 1 The Greeks
took the form and gave it new meaning and grace. These
spiral curves of the Ionic capital may seem unmeaning. It
is not the form which naturally suggests itself for support,
but it is beautiful in itself, and it gives to the capital
1 See Fcrgusson’s * History of Architecture,’ vol. i. pp. 179, 196.


--page 189

an impression of spring and elasticity. These two orders
were used simultaneously by the Greeks. They are not
successive developments of different ages, like the styles
of Gothic architecture. Nor were they confined like
national styles to districts of their own. One of the most
splendid examples of the Corinthian order is the temple of
Jupiter Olympus, at Athens, and one of the oldest and most



Fig. 54. ERECHTHEUM, ATHENS.


Fig. 55.

' GRECIAN IONIC.


TEMPLE ON THE ILISSUS.


remarkable examples of Doric is at Corinth, where no
specimens of the Corinthian order now remain.

The proportions of these orders were not fixed by un-
alterable rules according to the “Classic” idea. The
order of the Erechtheum (fig. 54) is about nine diameters
high ; that of the temple on the Ilissus (fig. 55), about
seven and a half, the weight to be supported being



--page 190

more massive and simpler. Both are right, the various
parts of the architecture being made to harmonise in their
proportions.

The Corinthian is rather a Roman, than a Greek order,
the examples of it which occur in Greece having been
erected under its Roman masters. It is par-excellence the
Roman order*, they loved it for its magnificence and



Fig. 56. TEMPLE OF VESTA, TIVOLI. Fig. 57. TEMPLE OF JUPITER OLYMPUS,

ATHENS.

THE CORINTHIAN ORDER.

sumptuousness. In it spiral volutes, springing from a crown
of acanthus leaves which surrounds the bell of the capital,
mask the junction between the round bell and the corners
of the abacus ; which is not square in plan, as in the Doric,
but hollowed in the centre and projecting at the angles.

We all know the story about the discovery of the
Corinthian Capital, told in every treatise on the Orders, from


--page 191

Vitruvius downwards, how a basket (shaped like those we
use as waste-paper baskets), covered with a square tile or
“abacus,” having been left beside an acanthus plant, the
plant climbed up the basket and turned round in spirals
under the projecting angles of the tile.

The forms of architecture seemed to the ancients so
immutable that any change in them seemed to them to
need a special interposition.

But the Corinthian capital may be
accounted for by the ordinary process of
natural development. The capitals at
the angles in the Ionic order (see figs. 54
and 55, page 189) had spirals on each face,
unlike the intermediate capitals of the
range, which had the spirals only on the
front and back faces. The two meeting
spirals at each corner of the capital
coalesced into a horn supporting the
corner of the abacus.

The ornament round the neck of the
column seen in the order of the Erech-
theum (fig. 54, page 189), which was at
first merely painted, was afterwards
carved in relief, as in this instance. With
the desire for greater richness in Roman
taste, it was merely a natural develop-
ment to carve this ornament round the
neck in richly cut leaves in high relief.

This process is better seen in what is
called the Composite order (fig. 58), from its being supposed
to be a union of the Ionic and Corinthian. It is merely a
ruder form of the latter, in which the spiral horns at the
corner are more delicate and refined.

There is no question that the Corinthian capital is more
logical in form than either the Doric or Ionic. So far it is



Fig. 58. THE COMPOSITE
ORDER. — ARCH OF
SEPTIMIUS SEVERUS
ROME.


--page 192

an advance and improvement. It is natural that the
capital should expand to receive the weight ; the Doric
capital so expands, but leaves the corners of the abacus
unsupported. The form of expansion in the Ionic is not
that suggested by the function which it has to perform.
But the Corinthian capital carries the line of support, in the
simplest and most natural manner, from the round of the
column up to the square of the abacus.

It has continued the normal type of capital ever since,
through the Byzantine and Gothic styles ; often beautifully
modified ; birds and animals being substituted for the
spiral horns to support the corners of the abacus.

It may appear as if Greek architecture judged by the
test of being at present understood and practised might
have been passed over as unsuitable for our use ; that
the enthusiasm for the style among highly educated
persons, which followed the publication of Stuart and
Revett’s ‘Antiquities of Athens,’ and our possession and
appreciation of the Elgin Marbles, had passed away ;
that no one would think now of building a church like
St. Pancras, or of attempting a reproduction of the Par-
thenon, like the unfinished National Monument on the
Calton Hill in Edinburgh. The style required special
knowledge and learning for understanding it, and was
never generally appreciated. As practised with us, it was
cold and formal ; and, as there were very few specimens
to copy from and only the most perfect of these were
followed, there was a weary sameness in the results. The
sculpture which had given life and interest to the original
was omitted ; colour was thought vulgar ; and the general
impression of one of those Doric porticos in our climate,
in any weather, but especially in an east wind with sleet
driving through it, was dismal and depressing.

The style had also the serious practical disadvantage for


--page 193

our climate, that windows were supposed to be inadmissible.
As it was impossible wholly to dispense with them, they
were ignored, like vulgar intruders in good society, and
treated as if no one was expected to look at them, as plain
holes cut in the wall, without any ornament or moulding
whatever. This of course, otdy made them more painfully
conspicuous. Smuggled in between columns, and cutting
up what should have been their solid background of wall,
they became vulgar and objectionable.

These mistakes, however, do not prove that Greek
architecture is unfitted for our domestic purposes ; for they
arose from too slavish adherence to a very limited number
of copies, all of which were from temples built for purposes
wholly different from our civil buildings or houses.

In Greek temples like the Parthenon, only about half
the space under the roof is enclosed. All the rest is open,
merely a roof supported on pillars ; the object being to
provide the worshippers with shade, shelter from cold not
being needed. The enclosed part, the dwelling of the
god, was more sacred ; its solid walls a painted background
for the white columns. To attempt to adapt forms re-
sulting from an arrangement like this, to modern domestic
or municipal purposes, could only result in failure. It
showed little appreciation of Greek art to imagine that
this was following it ; but temples being the only build-
ings remaining, no other course was open to copiers, who
as usual, in zeal for form, managed to miss the spirit.
They could not see that lor every different purpose the
Greeks had a different form ; that pains were taken to
make buildings, whose uses were not the same, dissimilar ;
to place them on different levels, and even change the archi-
tecture, though they formed all part of the same group or
even of the same building. All this they might have
seen, had they only had eyes, in the Erechtheum (fig. 59,

VOL. i. o


--page 194

which is really more varied in its outline and more pur-
posely irregular than any Gothic church. Being three
temples, the architect did not see why he should make
it look like one ; and so he has made the architecture of
each different. So also when two buildings were near one
another, the Greeks avoided placing them at right angles
or in right line. They saw no reason for destroying by



Fig. 59. THE ERECHTHEUM.


perpetual straight lines and right angles all variety and
play of shadow, as we do in our modern streets.

Nor has Greek ornament the frigid dull cast-iron character
which any one who had only seen the reproductions of
it in modern work would suppose. It has the same free-
hand irregularity and variety as Gothic ornament, but the


--page 195

copiers thought to improve on the original by reducing
everything to dead sameness.

Some reproductions of Greek architecture, notably the
High School at Edinburgh, appreciated this adaptability
and variety of the style ; but all are cold and formal, and
rather depressing in their effect, and they must be utterly
unlike in character to what, for lighter domestic purposes,
the “merry Greeks” themselves produced.

Their domestic architecture has perished ; from the re-
mains of Pompeii, in the Greek colony of Magna Graecia,
we have an idea of the decoration of their houses in the
latest times, but of their external architecture few traces are
left. It must be a libel on their taste to suppose that it at
all resembled that which they employed in the temples, in
form or solemn character, or in anything except grace and
beauty, and suitableness to its own purpose.

There is an antique bass-relief in the British Museum
representing the visit of Bacchus to Icarius. The back-
ground is formed by the house, which has simple windows
with a square pillar in the centre of each, dividing it like
a mullion ; a low pitched roof covered with tiles, but no
portico for mere ornament, in imitation of a temple, as in
our Classic houses of last century. .

The appreciation of this practical common sense, which
characterised the domestic architecture of the old Greeks,
has lately given rise in France to what is called the
Neogrec or new Greek style, in which some houses and
villas have been built in Paris, characterised by grace
and elegance, the architects showing such a knowledge of
Greek art that they dare use it with freedom.

Glasgow possesses some examples, due to the genius of
the late Alexander Thomson, of a treatment of Greek archi-
tecture characterised by great freedom and originality, and
appreciation of its severer beauties, if not of its playfulness
and lighter elegancies. He had few chances of showing


--page 196

his power, but everything he designed, even common
houses for building speculators, has an unmistakable stamp
of genius and originality. His enthusiasm for art, and his
unswerving allegiance to it, which made him reject any
personal advantages at the cost of what he believed to be
right, have left their influence, and have raised the character
of the architecture of the city.

So far, therefore, as our second condition of freedom is
concerned, no exception can he taken to the use of Greek
in domestic architecture. Symmetry and regularity were
not thought essential. Irregularity is admissible, indeed
is enjoined, when it arises naturally and truthfully from
the purposes of the building. Windows may be large or
small, as occasion requires ; and the style is even flexible
enough to adopt some mode of dividing windows, probably
by means of slender pillars and cornices, which would serve
the purposes of mullions and transom in carrying the
architecture across wider openings.

Some hold that architecture, properly so called, did not
exist for the Greeks ; that it was first invented by the
Romans, when the}^ discovered the arch and developed it in
vaulting ; that before this it no more existed than the
modern sciences did before the time of Bacon ; that, though
whatever the Greeks did they did well, their architecture
is only a refinement of Stonehenge, setting up two long
stones and laying a third on the top of them.

Certainly, now that we know the arch, it would be an
impossible folly to reject the use of it in our houses, for
it would deprive us of the use of bricks aud small stones
for bridging over openings, causing needless expense, and
depriving us of many charming effects which those who
have gone before us have taught us. But to adopt the
arch in Greek architecture would be carrying freedom so
far as to abolish the style altogether.

As regards our third condition — its suitableness to our


--page 197

highest art — more could be said in its favour now than
would have been possible a few years ago. Our sculpture,
indeed, has always looked to Greek art as its highest model,
and would easily adopt its forms. Of late years pro-
minent artists like Leighton, Poynter, and Albert Moore,
have painted Classical subjects in a Grreek manner, and the
tendency seems to be growing ; but the great mass of our
art is out of its influence, and it will probably continue to
be admired and practised only by a few.

It cannot be objected to the style, that it would be
impossible or even difficult to find suitable furnishing for
it. Since Wedgwood’s days, pottery and ornaments have
affected its forms ; and in general furnishing the style of
the first French Empire, or the Classic delicacy of the time
of Queen Anne, which still linger among us, are not
unsuitable to it. But while we may expect to see Greek
art crop out occasionally in architecture and painting, as
well as in sculpture, there is no reasonable prospect of its
ever being generally adopted in this country. It may be
the highest and purest style, but Guinevere preferred
Lancelot to the stainless Arthur, and it may be too high
and pure for us. It has high merits, but most people can-
not see them. It is not popular, and is even hated for its
strangeness.

Nor would any one who really loved it wish to see it in
the hands of ordinary builders, or of the mass of architects.
The result would be even worse than the vulgarising of
Gothic, for its beauties are more delicate and refined. It
is as little a natural expression of our nature as of that of
the Romans, who, though they professed to admire, and
attempted to copy it, spoiled it in their reproductions. Its
main influence on them was to delay them for some
centuries in developing a true style for themselves, and
the chances are that the attempt to adopt it would have
a similar influence on us.


--page 198

Although, therefore, its merits and its capacity of adapta- •
tion to our domestic wants are greater than in the specimens
we have been accustomed to see, any attempts to revive it
will be isolated and without general result. The nation
must change before it can comply with our first test of
suitableness — some prospect of its general adoption.


--page 199


CHAPTER VII.


CLASSICAL OR RENAISSANCE ARCHITECTURE.


I N answering the question as to what style of architecture
is best suited for our houses, it only remains for us to
consider the various styles which are included under the
general name of Classical architecture ; all influenced more
or less by the enthusiasm for Classical literature, and for
old Roman art, which, under the name of the Renaissance
or Revival (from the supposed darkness of the Middle
Ages), sprung up in Italy in the fifteenth century, and has
become part of all modern civilisation.

The memory of the old Roman Imperial power, which the
barbarians destroyed, influenced the whole period of the
Middle Ages. The law and order, and the civilisation which
Charlemagne established was an attempt to revive the rule
of the Roman Ceesar. The monasteries preserved the litera-
ture of Rome, and continued the traditions of its architecture.

In the thirteenth century there was an earlier Renaissance
within the limits of the Middle Ages , 1 which showed itself

1 See Pater’s ‘Studies in the History of the Renaissance.’ London. Mac-
millan &amp; Co. 1873.


--page 200

in the Yerse of Dante and of the Troubadours ; and in
Gothic architecture, which was the logical development of
the Roman vault and arch.

“The word Renaissance,” Mr. Pater says, “is now
generally used to denote not merely that revival of classical
antiquity which took place in the fifteenth century, and to
which the word was first applied, but a whole complex
movement, of which that revival of classical antiquity was
but one element or symptom. For us the Renaissance is
the name of a many-sided hut yet united movement, in
which the love of the things of the intellect and the
imagination for their own sake, the desire for a more liberal
and comely way of conceiving life, make themselves felt,
prompting those who experience this desire to seek first one
and then another means of intellectual or imaginative en-
joyment, and directing them not merely to the discovery
of old and forgotten sources of this enjoyment, but to divine
new sources of it, new experiences, new subjects of poetry,
new forms of art. Of this feeling there was a great out-
break in the end of the twelfth and the beginning of the
following century.”

In the fifteenth century when the Classic traditions, which
had vegetated in the Eastern Empire since the time of Con-
stantine, were driven by the conquest of Constantinople to
the West, they burst into new life in the fresh soil of the
vigorous Western nations. The new learning brought them
light and life : their past efforts in literature and philosophy
seemed gropings in the dark. Even the old pagan worship
of Nature with its unrestrained enjoyment of life and
beauty, which Christianity and asceticism had for centuries
been suppressing, found sympathisers in cultivated minds and
in the high places of the Church. Some enthusiasts even
revived Roman manners, holding banquets lasting several
days, reclining On couches, dressed like old Romans.

When such a spirit prevailed it was inevitable that


--page 201

Classic architecture should revive. This Revival or Re-
naissance came first in Italy. As the intellectual centre
of the world she was the first to be influenced by the
new learning 1 , and in architecture she had no vigorous
native school of Gothic to oppose to the new spirit. For
in Italy Gothic architecture had never properly taken
root. It was there an exotic imported from the North ;
a copy of the form without the spirit. In the brighter
Southern climate it developed a richness of colour and
softness of form of its own, hut it lost the nerve and vigour
of the native Northern style. Italian Gothic always re-
mained somewhat Classic in character. The capitals were
a modification of Corinthian; the columns were generally
cylinders, like Classic ones, not divided into a number of
little shafts as in the true Northern style. In Italy the
ancient Classic buildings, many of which remained — pre-
served from destruction as stone quarries by being utilised as
churches and castles — and possibly also the old traditions of
workmanship 1 kept alive the seeds of Classic architecture.
In drawings by old masters, painters and architects, we
have evidence that these Roman remains were studied and
measured with the same interest and precision as Gothic
churches have been in our own day by young architects.

Although it was Greek literature which supplied the
chief force of the new learning, Greek architecture was un-
known or at least unnoticed. In Raphael’s picture of Paul
preaching at Athens, the buildings of the Acropolis, which
form the background, are Roman not Greek in style.

The architecture of old Rome was the representative of
both Greek and Roman ideas in architecture. Hence it

1 When Mr. Castellani revived old Etruscan gold work, he found in remote
comers of the Abruzzi, workmen who inherited the tradition and the skill of
executing the beautiful granulated surface of Etruscan gold ornaments. This effect
is produced by the actual soldering together of innumerable minute points of gold.


--page 202

became Classic , the standard of right ; and buildings
were admirable in proportion as they conformed to its
rules. These rules were at first uncertain, for the ancient
buildings themselves varied in their proportions, but they
soon became systematised and absolutely fixed. Purity was
conformity with these rules ; aberrations from them were
sins against art.

The Romans seem to have been unconscious of the
artistic value of their own inventions in architectural
construction. To them we owe the use of the arch, the
inventions of vaulting and of the dome, and the practice of
placing one story above another. These are such wonderful
advances in architecture, that it may be fairly said the art
did not previously exist. All that the Greeks had done
in construction was to rest a long stone or lintel on the top
of two upright supports. Whatever they did they did
well, but it was no great thing to do. The arch revolu-
tionised architecture. It created a new art, the name of
which is derived from the new mode of construction. The
form of the arch is found in primitive constructions, in
which a space is covered over by successive layers of stones
laid on a flat bed, each projecting beyond that below it, the
top layers meeting and resting against each other, which
prevents them toppling in. This mode of construction is a
succession of corbels, not a true arch, in which the principle
of stability is quite different. In the arch the stones, each
cut into a wedge shape, are laid one above the other on a
wooden ring or centering till the top stone, called the
“closer” or “key stone,” unites the stones rising from each
side. The centering may then be removed, for the wedge-
shape of each stone prevents it from falling in. But each
stone by its weight and by the weight of any wall it carries
acts like a wedge, tending to split the arch open ; their
united weight tending to thrust out the lowest stones or
“springers” on each side, and the walls or pillars on which


--page 203

these rest, and also the arch stones immediately above the
springers, for, as these rest partly on their sides, they do not
act with the same force as wedges as the upper stones which
press with their whole weight downwards. The arch will
fall if it widens enough to let any one stone slip through.
The springers and a few of the arch stones above them must
therefore be kept in their places, which is done by placing
against them a mass of masonry called the “abutment” of
such weight that its resistance is greater than the outward
thrust of the arch.

Wherever the arch was invented, the Romans were
the first to see and make use of its enormous advantages
in building construction. Lintel construction could span
spaces only a few feet wide, and to do this required large
stones difficult to procure. By the use of the arch the
whole width of great buildings could be spanned by means
of small stones, or even of bricks.

The Vault, which the Romans invented, is only a widened
arch. An arch is the width of the wall it carries, a vault is
an arched covering of a building. The Dome, which was also
a Roman invention, is a vault covering a circular building.
The springers instead of being straight in plan, as in the
vault and arch, are each a portion of the circle which forms
the circumference of the building. Each ring in a dome is
an arch laid horizontal, and its arch-stones are wedge-shaped
on four sides, not on two only as in the simple arch. It needs,
therefore, no key-stone to complete it, but may be left off at
the height of any completed ring, as in the Pantheon ; whose
only window is a circular opening thirty feet wide left in the
apex.

The great civic buildings of the Romans under the empire
gave splendid scope for the employment of these new inven-
tions in arched construction. The Greeks had not needed
such buildings. The assemblies of the people for politics and
games, and even their courts of justice, were held in the open


--page 204

air. Their houses were simple. Their great buildings were
their temples in which they adhered religiously to old forms.
The Roman baths had great halls, the rendezvous of an idle
people ; which gave magnificent opportunity for vaulted and
domed ceilings ; and their courts of justice or basilicas, at
first uncovered courts surrounded by arcades, were in later
times covered in by vaults.

But when the Romans first began to carry out this
arched construction which they had invented, they showed

the mastery which the Greeks
whom they had conquered had
over them as artists. They
seemed to feel that their arched
buildings could have no place
in art unless they possessed
the essential features of Greek
architecture — the columns
with the mass of stone or
lintel which they supported.
They therefore added the
Greek architecture as an orna-
ment to their own, putting it
as a covering or screen over
their arched construction,
which was seen through the
spaces formed by the columns
and lintel. The Arch of
Hadrian at Athens (fig. GO)
is an early example of this
combination, in which, however, the parts are awkwardly
put together . 1 The practice of later times especially of
the Renaissance architects, produced more harmony be-
tween the parts, though the idea is at best a make-shift

1 For the use of this and of the other illustrations of the Classic orders, taken from
Rickman’s ‘Gothic Architecture,’ I am indebted to the kindness of Mr. James Parker
of Oxford.



AT ATHENS.



--page 205
--page 206

Fi&lt; 7 . 61


CUSTOM HOUSE, KING'S LYNN.


--page 207

and can never produce a result perfectly satisfactory. The
Colosseum at Rome (fig. 21, page 59, in a former chapter)
is a magnificent example of this treatment, though our
drawing does not fully show this, as it is intended rather
to give an idea of the mass and grandeur of the building
than of its details.

The illustration of the old Roman gate called the Porta
Nigra, or black gate, at Treves (fig. 62), gives some
idea of this characteristic of Roman architecture. With
the revival of Classic architecture this feature was re-
vived, and to
the present
day it con-
tinues a fav-
ourite means of
giving splen-
dour to Classic
buildings. It
was employed
in theVenetian
(see

illustrations of
the Yand ra-
mi ni palace,

fig. 71, page
228, and of the

Cornaro and Pesaro palaces, figs. 72 and 74, pp. 230 and 234) ;
frequently in France, as at Versailles ; and in England, as in
the lower story of the little building at King’s Lynn, illus-
trated in fig. 61. But in this case as in many others, instead
of round pillars against the wall, we have what are called
pilaste?'s, merely flat, projections on the wall, with base and
capital-like pillars. The pillars were ornamental, they did
no work ; they were expensive and necessitated great thick-
ness of wall. A similar effect was obtained at much less cost




Fig. 62 . PORTA NIGRA, TREVES.


--page 208

by flat projections. The expedient had the sanction of ancient
authority (see Roman capital carved in brick, fig. 63), and is
a part of Classic architecture. Mr. Fergusson considers it the
special curse of modern architecture ; if he were Chancellor
of the Exchequer he would put a tax on every pilaster. But
it is a simple and ready means of giving proportion and
effect to buildings, by supplying perpendicular lines, as
cornices and strings give horizontal lines, and I do not see

why we should be deprived
of it.

In another way the
columns and lintels of
Greek architecture were
used to impart the element
of art to Roman buildings.
The gable-end of the
Greek temple, which con-
sists (see fig. 20, p. 56,
Temple at Paestum, and
fig. 52, page 186) of a
portico formed of pillars
supporting a flat triangular
gable or pediment, was
stuck on as an ornamental
porch to a Roman building,
as in the Pantheon at Rome.
In England in the eighteenth century such porticos were
stuck on the front of every house with any pretence to
architecture, often on an upper story, where they could have
no meaning as a porch. Fig. 64 shows an early specimen
of this treatment in this country by Inigo Jones.

Such uses of the Greek sytsem of construction showed in
the Romans a want of fine artistic perception ; but it was
the natural outcome of their character and circumstances,



Fig. 63. EOMAN CAPITAL, CARVED
IN BRICK.



--page 209

and it produced grand and magnificent results. It was
eminently practical ; and utilised admirably the capacities of
the various nations who were under their rule and did their
work. The walls and vaults and simple masses of their
buildings could be constructed by ordinary slave labour
properly directed, while the skill of the Greeks in art was
employed to decorate them with mouldings and carved
capitals and statues in marble. The result, though it had



FRONT ELEVATION


Fig. 64. AMRESBURY, PRINCIPAL, FRONT.

not the perfect refinement of Greek art, was admirable in its
own way. It is a different kind of glory from the glory of
Greek architecture — a lower kind — sumptuous rather than
refined.

Roman architecture tended to work itself clear of the
extraneous ornaments of Greek columns and lintel. In
engineering works, such as aqueducts, they had been from
VOL. I. P


--page 210

the first dispensed with. In Diocletian’s great palace at
Spalatro, where he retired when he resigned the empire, the
arch becomes more prominent as an architectural feature.
In the Church of St. Sophia at Constantinople, built by
Justinian in the first half of the sixth century, all trace
of Greek construction, and of “the orders/’ has disappeared.
The architecture consists of arches, vaults, and domes
appropriately decorated. But this natural
development, which is a sign of life and
truth in the architecture, has been counted
degradation, the result of ignorance and error.
After describing the splendid marble columns
of St. Sophia, Gibbon, expressing the opinion
of his time, adds, “but every order of archi-
tecture disclaims their fantastic capitals.” * 1 It
was left to Gothic architecture under new
conditions to give a new development to the
principle of the arch.

In adopting the Greek orders the Romans
altered and vulgarised them, bringing them
better into harmony with their own feelings
and the use they made of them, giving them
greater richness and ornament, and less grace
and delicacy of line. The delicate parabolic

curve of the capital of the Grecian Doric,
Fig . 65. roman almost a straight line, became a segment of a
of marofalus circle. They omitted the flutings not from

AT ROME* » -i , . • • .i • 1

parsimony, but not perceiving their use and
value, preferring instead of the white marbles of the Greeks,
richly coloured marbles, whose surface the flutings would
have spoilt. To the Doric order they added a base, the



1 We have learnt to see such capitals now with different eyes. They are’ full of
beauty and variety. The carving of their acanthus leaves is Greek, rather than
Roman, in spirit and delicacy of line. A similar treatment of capitals is found in
Gothic buildings of the thirteeth century, especially in France.


--page 211

want of which is even painfully obvious in the illustration
(fig. 65) from the Theatre of Marcellus at Rome, as the
solid base is omitted on which, in Greek architecture,
the Doric column rests. They lost the Greek proportions,
elongating the columns, reducing the weight of the en-
tablature or supported mass, and depriving the architecture
of its dignity. In their hands the Ionic order was sub-




Fig. 66.


AQUEDUCT OF HADRIAN, Fig. 67.

ATHENS.


ROMAN IONIC.


TEMPLE OF FORTUNA VIR1LIS,
ROME.


jected to a similar transformation. It is less severe, the
columns are slenderer, the entablature of less depth, the
shadow of the projecting cornice modified by a deep
moulding supporting it.

The illustration from the Aqueduct of Hadrian at Athens
(fig. 66) shows an invention of the Romans, in combining
their own arched architecture with the Greek orders, which


--page 212

became a feature of Classic and especially of Renaissance
architecture. This example is clumsy and imperfect in
the combination of its parts. In adopting the idea the
Renaissance architects carried the whole entablature and
cornice over the two pillars, and rested the arch on the
top of the cornice instead of, as in this instance, on the top
of the architrave. They made the arch much lighter, only
the width of the architrave.

In the buildings which the Romans left in Italy and
elsewhere, the Renaissance architects believed they found
five different orders of architecture, and therefore the science
of architecture had five orders and no more. Besides
the three orders of the Greeks they found the Tuscan,
which, as Palladio says, “is the most plain and simple of
all the orders of architecture, as it retains more of the old
simplicity, and is devoid of all those ornaments which give
so great a grace and beauty to the others.” 1 “In it,” he
says, “the intercolumnations may be very wide, because
the architraves are made of timber.”

In old Roman practice the treatment and proportions of
the Orders were by no means fixed, and in the modification
of the Corinthian, which w r e have already described, which
some Roman architect in the exercise of this liberty had pro-
duced, was found a new order, the Composite (see page 191,
fig. 58). Palladio looks on these orders as ultimate facts
of science. That a new order should be added was as
impossible as the creation of a new animal. Frenrt, Sieur
de Chambray, in Louis Quatorze’s time in an interesting
treatise, “made English for the benefit of builders,” by John
Evelyn, the author of the Diary, goes farther. He refuses
to address himself to those who pretend that “the mind is

1 Andrea Palladio’s ‘First Book of Architecture,’ with all the plates exactly copied
from the first Italian edition, printed in Venice, a.D. 1570. Revised by Colin
Campbell, Esq., Author of ‘Vitruvius Britannicus.’


--page 213

free, not bound, and that we have as good right to invent
and follow our own Genius , as the Antients, without ren-
dering ourselves their slaves ; since Art is an infinite thing,
growing every day to more perfection.” “The three orders
which are derived to us from the Greeks, not only contain
whatsoever is excellent, but likewise all that is necessary, of
architecture ; there being but three manners of building :
the solid , the mean (or intermediate), and the delicate .”
He complains that, “we daily behold these orders so
disfigured and ill-treated by the workmen of this age that.,
to speak seriously, there remains not so much as a single
member which has not received some strange and monstrous
alteration.”

Yet Freart seems to have had no perception that the
orders, as employed by the best authorities, differed in their
character from Greek architecture ; the faith in their autho-
rity was too strong for any such questioning. There was
some doubt as to whether the Doric column should have a
base ; the authority of the order of the Theatre of Marcellus
was against it, but the feeling of its necessity prevailed
against authority. The principle of authority checked the
free development of architecture, in a way unknown in the
medigeval styles. The evil was not that the new architec-
ture was derived from the old. It might have developed
freely, as one language may develop freely which is derived
from another. But the new forms of life which were con-
stantly springing up were compelled to conform to dead
rules : and under the force of this compulsion, the style was
continually recurring to the original type. Instead of, as
would have been the case in a natural growth, becoming-
less like the original, its aberrations were greatest at first ;
just as a school boy’s Latin theme is marked at first by
English idioms, which disappear with his more perfect
knowledge of classic authorities.

The absolute authority of the five orders became


--page 214

established about the time that the new opinions of the
Renaissance in religion were being crystallised into the
symbols and standards of the various churches.

There was an outburst of free thought and natural de-
velopment, both in architecture and in religion, before this
result was attained. In both provinces it was condemned and
as far as possible suppressed by the decrees of the Council
of Trent and of Protestant synods, as at Dort ; but, in the
early days of the Renaissance, architecture happily had free
course. The genius of the great Italians, when they revived
the ancient architecture, discovered, perhaps unconsciously,
new proportions. Alberti, Michael Angelo, Palladio and
other architects, followed different proportions in the orders;
and in matters where the guidance of the ancients failed
them, and they had to trust to their own invention, they
worked out a new development of style.

The new learning crossed the Alps carrying with it the
new architecture, which was accepted as authoritative and
true. But the native Gothic styles had too much vitality
to be crushed out by it, and, like conquered peoples, mingled
with their conquerors. In each country a new style was
produced which united with the old native the features of
the new Classic style. The varieties of these styles almost
defy classification. Each country had its own, and in each
the style varied according to the strength of the Classical
knowledge or native habit. To the learned, like Freart or
Evelyn, they were all abominable; a corruption of pure
Classic by barbarous admixture. Such men could not see
that they were natural growths, inevitable in the circum-
stances, and worthy of study like any other natural
production. Even living writers have hardly realised this.
The advocates of Gothic and of Classic have alike abused
these styles ; but their turn of appreciation lias come.
Correct Classic, asphyxiated by its own rules, had, forty years


--page 215

ago, become tiresome, almost dead, when a fresh rising of
the Gothic spirit, the result of the Romantic revival, asserted
freedom and common sense in architecture. This new
spirit influenced all the leading thought of the day, and
the authority of the orders was for ever broken. But the
wave of the Romantic revival began to ebb. The spirit of
the Renaissance reasserted itself as the basis of our modern
ideas and life. Poets felt once more the meaning of the
worship of Nature and of the old Gods.

In architecture those who had felt the enthusiasm for
Gothic, who had drunk in its spirit and had made it a part
of themselves, awoke to the consciousness that it was not the
expression of modern ideas, or of the domestic requirements
of modern life. But they could not return to the thral-
dom of the Orders, or give up for architecture the right of
free development, which the Gothic movement had won.
Trained and formed in Gothic, the spirit of the Renaissance
coming to them with the force of new truth, they were
under the same influences as the earliest Renaissance
architects. They naturally produced work with the same
characteristics, and found these styles the expression of
their own state of feeling and models for their work.
To this stream of tendency, I believe, it is due that these
early Renaissance styles have again become interesting ;
the objects of study and the models for modern work. I
believe it possible that, freed from the obligation to conform
to the fixed Classic rules, a natural style, the growth of our
modern wants, may be founded on them.

From the variety of influences under which these old
styles were formed, the varieties of them almost defy
classification. They cannot be arranged chronologically
like the Mediaeval Gothic styles, in which the growth
is regular and the style of each century is similar in each
country, for the force of the new spirit varied in different
places at the same time. St. Peter’s at Rome ; the Spire of


--page 216

Beauvais ; King’s College Chapel, Cambridge ; and Renais-
sance buildings in France, were being built at the same
time, and traces of Gothic continued in England, long after
Inigo Jones bad begun Whitehall .

It would be altogether beside our purpose to attempt
a complete account or history of these styles. We shall
content ourselves with describing some specimens, taken
very much at random, as they appeared picturesque or
interesting, or furnished some feature suitable for modern
use. I have not given illustrations of palaces ; those who
wish to learn about them will find them treated of in Mr.
Fergusson’s book. Our interest is in houses on a scale that
we might ourselves possibly live in. In such smaller
houses, the new style had free development, for their
builders, imperfectly learned in the Classic rules, continued
old traditions and altered the Orders to suit themselves,
sometimes with a true feeling and sense of art. Palaces
were bound to conform to the strictest rules of Classic art
and therefore have not the variety and suggestiveness of
less important buildings.


--page 217

CHAPTER Yin.


THE RENAISSANCE IN FLORENCE AND SIENNA.


I N the revival of Classic architecture in Italy, Rome was not
the leader. Reduced in population and in wealth by
the faction fights of her nobles, and by the absence of the
Popes in Avignon, she did not recover sufficiently to erect
new buildings till the beginning of the sixteenth century.

The first architects who were touched by the new spirit
were Florentines. Brunelleschi, who was born in 1377,
conceived the idea of covering with a dome the crossing of
the nave and transepts of the cathedral of his native city
which its Gothic architects had left unfinished, and he
devoted his life to realise this idea. Going to Rome to
study the dome of the Pantheon he learned Roman archi-
tecture and introduced it into his work. Returning to
Florence he used the new style without a trace of Gothic
admixture in the churches of San Lorenzo, commenced in
1425, and San Spirito.

Alberti, born about 1406, a scholar before he was an
architect, advanced the movement greatly by his writings.
He built several churches, as those of St. Francis at Rimini,
and St. Andrew at Mantua, in perfectly pure Classic.


--page 218

In domestic architecture the change was not so readily
made, for the old style showed itself long afterwards in
pointed arches and traceried windows and great rusticated
stones, which the necessity for strong buildings for defence,
as well as a feeling for picturesque grandeur, had made a
characteristic of the old Gothic palaces of Florence.

In this, as in the recent Gothic movements, the new style
was used for churches by people, who would never have
thought of giving up the style for their dwelling-houses they
had been accustomed to. In the Pitti Palace, commenced by
Brunelleschi in 1435, the arches are all pointed, and the
wall is composed of great stones, some of enormous size, 1
left rough on the surface, though carefully jointed.

In the Rucellai Palace 2 (which Alberti commenced in
1460), the roughness of the rustication is toned down, and
the walls ornamented with pilasters between the arched
windows, recalling the characteristic feature of the old
Roman style ; but though the arches have now become
round, they are still filled with a form of tracery.

The Nicollini Palace, of which I give an illustration
(fig. 68), shows an interesting mingling of Gothic and
Classic features. The outside line of the arches is pointed
while the opening is round, making the arch stones deepest
at the top — a feature common in Italian Gothic work much
commended by Mr. Ruskin. Inside these are Classic pilas-
ters (not properly shown in the cut), supporting round and
pointed arches. The cornices are Classic, though without
strict adherence to ancient authority. The loggia at the top,
a feature which gives much of its charm to Florentine
architecture, has lent itself perfectly to Classic forms.

Mr. Fergusson thinks that this palace is of later date than
the early period of the transition, and that Bramante may
have been its architect. More likely it is of the time of

1 I measured some between 20 and 30 i’eet long.

2 A wood-cut of this palace is given by Mr. Fergusson, vol. iii. p. 8G.


THE RENAISSANCE IN FLORENCE AND SIENNA. 219

Brunelleschi, to whom it is usually attributed, who died the
year Bramante was born (a.d. 1444), and whose style, as
shown in the work which it is known he designed, like
the palace of the Cancelleria at Rome, is quite different in
character, being folly developed Classic. Judging from the


--page 219

Fig. 68. NICOLLINI PALACE, FLORENCE.


sections of its mouldings, given in Montigny and Famin’s
work on Florentine architecture, from which I have copied
the illustration, the Nicollini Palace does not seem to me to
have the lightness and elegance of detail which Mr. Fer-
gusson attributes to it (‘History of Architecture,’ vol. iii.



--page 220

chap. 87). The appearance of lightness from the want
of the rustication of the wall surface, which might he
supposed to indicate a later date, is due rather to part of the
front being of brick, a common material in Italian Gothic.
Making the whole of the rest of the surface of rough stones
would have been incongruous, consequently the lower
stories, which are of stone, have their stones hewn smooth
on the surface ; but the appearance of strength is retained
by rusticating the angles and arches. The arches and
angles beside the brickwork are also hewm smooth, from
the same desire of avoiding too great contrast, while the
piers of the loggia above them are in single stones. The
angle piers of the building thus gradually get smoother
as they rise ; they are rusticated in the two lower stories,
where the appearance of strength w’as desired, of hewn stone
in the next, in the highest without any joint at all. The
different surfaces of rough stone, hewn stone, and brick, are
used together with great artistic skill ; the Gothic and Classic
features are combined without any sense of incongruity ; and
the result is a noble and artistic design in admirable harmony.

Like other Italian palaces, the Florentine have a great
open central court surrounded by open arcades, which gives
access to the rooms on each story ; probably a tradition from
the houses of Rome and Pompeii. In the architecture of
these arcades we find no trace of Gothic. In some cases,
because being usually the last part of the building to be
finished, the Classic style may have come in by the time they
were built, but even if built at the same time as the fronts,
it may have been the fashion to use for them, as for churches,
the purer Classic style, which was admirably fitted for them.

In the neighbouring city of Sienna, architecture, both
in Mediaeval and Renaissance times, was under the same
influences as at Florence. In emerging from Gothic, her
early Renaissance took similar forms and passed through
the same stages. The Gothic towers overhanging the


--page 221

market-places in both cities are the same in form — an
unadorned square shaft, with great straight corbels sup-
porting little arches on which stand the battlements ; with
a smaller similar tower inside.

But the Sienna tower is of brick. Sienna had no quarries
which could give her the magnificent stones of Florence.
It is an unpractical criticism of Mr. Fergusson’s (vol. iii.
p. 89) that “the defect of the Sienna buildings is that the
stones employed are too small to give effect to a design
depending so much on rustication as the Tuscan palaces.”
There is no evidence that the Sienna architects aimed at the
Florentine effect of rough wall.

In the Spanocclii Palace, commenced by Giorgio in 1472,
the arches throughout, as in the Florentine palaces, have
the outline of the arch stones pointed, while the arch open-
ings are semi-circular. These are filled with tracery con-
sisting of two round arches with a circle over them. This
palace is built of tufa, a volcanic stone, the heads which look
out between the corbels of the cornice being in terra-cotta.

The Piccolomini Palace, built by the same architect about
thirty years later, is of travertine. It has the same kind
of tracery, but the pointed form of the outside rim of the
arch has disappeared. Montigny and Famin, the authors
of the excellent series of measured drawings of Tuscan
architecture (Paris 1866), to which I have already referred,
give the following estimate of the artistic merit of this
palace : “Dans son ensemble ce palais est d’un aspect

grandiose et pent etre considere comme un des plus
beaux de Toscane.” This is different from Mr. Fergusson’s
estimate of the same palace quoted above. With such
diversity of opinion among experts, what is the reader to
believe ? Such excathedra judgments are of little use. Art
criticism seems to me to be of value only when it enables us
to understand the meaning of a work of art, and the result
which has been obtained under the conditions.


--page 222


CHAPTER IX.


THE RENAISSANCE IN ROME.


IPHERE was little building in Rome till the beginning of
A the sixteenth century. Rome has no buildings showing
the transition from Grothic to Renaissance, for she had no
Grothic style of her own with which a compromise could
have been made, or which could have resisted the influence
of the splendid ancient Roman buildings she possessed.

The architects of her palaces were chiefly Florentines,
called there by the sumptuous expenditure in building of her
popes and nobles during the first half of the sixteenth
century. It is not within my plan to give examples of
palaces covering acres, of three great stories, each thirty
feet high. The social state which rendered them possible
has disappeared. I content myself with giving the eleva-
tion of a somewhat ordinary house with shops in the Via de’
Bianchi (fig. 69) said to have been designed by Sansovino, the
architect of the Library of St. Mark at Venice (born 1479,
died 1570). Mr. Fergusson might consider it bad art, because
it attempts to make two stories appear as if they were one.


--page 223

Ordinary houses must have bedrooms and five orsix stories of
different heights, and to group two stories of windows to-
gether into one story by means of cornices, or by pilasters, or
bv putting them under the same arch, as in some old Gothic



examples, is a method by which architects in various ages and
styles have given proportion to their buildings, thus
raising them above the artistic level of cotton mills. It
seems as legitimate as the grouping together of windows


--page 224

on the same story, a device which Mr. Fergusson frequently
commends. In this example the grouping of the windows
is simple and skilful. To remove the cornices which
divide the floors, or to put a cornice to mark each floor,
would take the dignity and meaning out of the elevation.
This house shows the Italian style fully developed, and it
is interesting as a prototype of the style which has be-
come the commonplace of London builders. For its success
it depends almost wholly on good proportion, which unfor-
tunately the London builders have not always given us.


--page 225


CHAPTER X.


VENETIAN RENAISSANCE.


ENICE had a flourishing style of Gothic of her


own, which, of all forms of Gothic, supplies the
examples best suited for modern use. It does not affect
the gloomy grandeur of the Florentine palaces, or the
small barred windows of French and English mediaeval
castles, for she was secure from foreign attack behind her
“streak of silver sea;” while the strong hand of her
oligarchy rendered fighting among the nobles, inside the
town, impossible. Her palaces therefore were never castles
or fortresses, but from the earliest times, in their fronts to
the canals, had more window than wall. Her sea-girt
position, like that of England, gave her colonies, and
commerce, and wealth ; in which others besides the great
nobles were sharers, which she spent largely in building.
Hence we find interesting specimens of architecture in mode-
rately sized houses (fig. 70). Her Gothic style was not pro-
perly Italian, for Venice was not properly a part of Italy.
Her people considered themselves Romans, and she con-
tinued the traditions of the Roman empire which had been


--page 226

transferred to the East, which influenced the eastern coast
of Italy long after it had lost the West. The shape of the
Doge’s cap, and the use on state occasions of umbrellas like
Eastern potentates, are traces of this Eastern influence. Her
Gothic has an Eastern character. Her treatment of the

pointed arch and her
pointed domes, recall
those of the Saracens
in their mosques,
or the Mohammedan
tombs of India. It
suggests a climate
sunnier even than
her own. When it
has been introduced
into this country, it
shivers like a Hindoo
in his white cotton
dress in London
streets. It is essen-
tially a coloured
architecture, delight-
ing in broad sur-
faces bright with
painting and coloured
marble. The pointed
arch was used more
as a beautiful form
than a necessity of construction ; it was ornamented by
coating it with marbles, not as in northern Gothic by
cutting it into mouldings marking the lines of construction.

Venetian Gothic was living and vigorous, and held its
own against the Classic influence till the beginning of the
sixteenth century, when it was still strong enough to force
a compromise. The characteristic form of old Roman and


Fig. 7u.


SMALL GOTHIC HOUSE AT VENICE.


--page 227
--page 228



Fig. II. VANDRAMINI PALACE, VENICE.






VENETIAN RENAISSANCE.


--page 229


revived Classic architecture was adopted — the round arch
behind a screen of columns and lintel — but the Gothic spirit
asserted itself in filling these arches with tracery, in which
Classic forms were used, similar to that which had been
already adopted by Alberti in Florence, and Giorgio in
Sienna (fig. 71, the Yandramini Palace). Though the com-
promise was natural in Italy, as is shown by its adoption in
Sienna and Florence, it was not adopted north of the Alps.
It is suited only for a round arch, and the northern Gothic,
in giving up the pointed arch for its windows, had adopted
not the round arch, but the straight lintel. In Italy, with
the growing taste there for correct Classic, this tracery was
felt to be unsatisfactory, and was soon abandoned. That it
is an expression of the Gothic spirit, is shown by the fact
that Sir Gilbert Scott has filled with it the windows of
Sir Christopher Wren’s Church of St. Michael’s, Cornhill,
which he has Gothicised. I dislike this form of tracery,
and have never seen any modern example of it which
seemed bearable ; but I find some difficulty in giving my
reasons for the feeling. It seems unmeaning, and without
any beauty of line, such as genuine Gothic tracery has.
Certainly it serves no practical need of modern architecture.

But every one admits the Yandramini Palace to be charm-
ing. The tracery looks well in it ; and for once Mr.
Fergusson pardons the introduction of the Orders as orna-
ment and does not suggest an improvement by the sub-
stitution of panelling. The design is so admirably worked
out, there is throughout such perfection of grace and
harmony, that it is impossible to find fault with it. It is
an instance of the old truth, that the artist is greater than
his materials, and can express himself in any forms, if they
are natural to him and he is used to them ; while he will
fail if he tries to fight, with arms “which be has not
proved.”

By the middle of the sixteenth century, the architecture


--page 230

had come under the same Classic influence in Venice as
in the rest of Italy ; San Michaeli was building several
palaces, and Sansovino had begun his celebrated Library of
St. Mark’s. The great Cornaro Palace on the Grand Canal
(fig. 72), commenced by the latter in 1532, gives some idea
of his style. The main idea, of the design is the same

as that in old
Roman archi-
tecture, ranges
of arches behind
a screen of co-
lumns and en-
tablature, but it
has a greater
amount of open-
ing than the
Roman, in pro-
portion to the
wall. There is
a variety of
treatment in the
lower and in
the uppermost
stories, and the
two main stories
are ornamented
by balustrades,
a charming in-
vention of the Italian Renaissance. These and later
architects who adorned the city were foreigners ; but,
whether they were inspired by the spirit of Venice or
worked to please Venetian tastes, their buildings are
characterised by an oriental magnificence unknown in other
Italian cities. “The great defect,” says Mr. Fergusson
(vol. iii. p. 95), “in Sansovino’s design of the Library of


--page 231

Fig. 72.


CORNARO PALACE, VENICE.



--page 232



Fig. 73


STAIRCASE OF DUCAL PALACE, VENICE.




--page 233

St. Mark, appears to be that the architectural ornament is
not necessarily a part of the construction.” “It is felt that
it might be away, or another class of ornament used, and
the building would not only stand, but might perhaps look
as well, or better. More than this, there is a quantity of
sculptured ornament, figures in the spandrils, boys and
wreaths in the frieze, and foliage elsewhere, which not only
is not construction, but does not even suggest it. If all this
were omitted the building would be relieved from that con-
fusion of parts which is one of its principal defects ; or,
if enrichment were necessary, more conventional ornament
would have attained the same end, and if it could have
been made to suggest construction, so much the better.”

This is to suggest the substitution, for that which he
criticises, of another wholly different design of Mr. Fer-
gusson’s own. Even if the Venetian architects could have
followed Mr. Fergusson’s instructions in designing their
buildings, whatever the gain might have been, it would
have lost us many charming bits of art, and interesting and
characteristic varieties of style. It seems wiser to accept
the productions of great artists as they left them, and to
endeavour to understand their meaning.

The view of the Staircase of the Ducal Palace (fig. 73)
is a striking example of this richness of ornament of the
Venetian Renaissance. It is said to have been designed by
Sansovino. Its peculiarities are more probably due to the
skill and fancy of Venetian workmen. It reminds us rather
of Gothic freedom and exuberance than of Classic purity, and
though almost lost among the richness, we can trace the
survival of Gothic forms in the central boss and ribs of the
vaulting. It is an example of the same sumptuous taste
and skill in carving which continued long afterwards to
produce richly carved furniture and mirror frames in Venice
and throughout Italy.

But all such irregularities were soon brought under strict


--page 234

Classic rule. The old art might still have some scope in
carved mirror frames and furniture, but, in building, the
Orders were the only rule. The art of architecture often be-
came a sort of puzzle of fitting together in the same building
orders of different dimensions, but, of course, of exactly the
same proportions. Palladio, in the Church of San Giorgio
Maggiore, hit on an expedient which was much admired, of
diminishing the size of the great order of the nave by raising



Fig. 74. PESARO PALACE, VENICE.


it on pedestals, so as to lessen its disproportion to the lesser
order of the aisles. The Orders sat upon Architecture like
the old man of the mountain ; they had to be carried about
into positions where they were altogether out of place, and
Architecture revenged the intrusion by reducing them to
mere ornaments, and asserted her freedom in the sumptuous
grandeur of the style of the Jesuits.

In the seventeenth century this spirit of rich magnificence
showed itself in external architecture. The Pesaro Palace,


--page 235

of which the accompanying woodcut (fig. 74) gives an in-
adequate idea, designed by Loughena about 1650, is a mass
of columns and sculpture, very rich and beautiful, and a fit
outcome of the spirit which made Yenice for a century
later the gayest and most brilliant capital of Europe and
the resort of all pleasure seekers.

In the Church of San Zenobio, built about 1680 (see
woodcut in Mr. Fergusson’s book), the facade is richly
ornamented with statues, and the gables are curved and
broken and tossed about with luxurious freedom.

The Church of Santa Maria della Salute, with its great
scrolls with statues on them leading up to the dome, may,
as Mr. Ruskin says, be bad architecture, but, with the
Dogana with its great gilded ball as a foreground, if we
may judge from the innumerable times it has been painted,
it must seem to artists the most charming of architectural
conqiositions. We cannot conceive of Yenice without it ; it
seems to embody her colour and beauty.

The west side of St. Mark’s Place is now occupied by a
palace, built for their emperor by the Austrians, in this
century while they held Yenice. It is very correct in style ;
all extravagances have been carefully avoided, but it is dull
and worthless as art, not worth criticism, and an example
of the result to which criticism and fixed rules of art
naturally lead.

The results worked out and embodied in the sixteenth
century by the great Florentine architects in Roman
palaces, by Palladio in Yicenza, and by Alessi in Genoa
(1500-1570), have ever since remained the rule and
standard for domestic architecture among all civilised
nations. All departures from these rules, however charming,
have been counted heresies, which it was the duty of all
who aimed at perfection in architecture to discourage and
suppress. The result has been the same as with fixed


--page 236

standards in other spheres of human thought and invention.
The changes and developments natural among different
peoples, or through individual genius, have been re-
strained, but only at the price of the loss of national
freedom and life in domestic architecture.

A copy is apt to fall short of the original model, and in
copying Italian palaces the builders on the other side of the
Alps worked under a special disadvantage. The grandeur
of the Italian palaces depends, in large measure, on the
great mass of wall in proportion to the window openings.
Each story is often thirty feet high, and the windows reach
only halfway to the ceiling, leaving above them a great
mass of unbroken wall. In the bright climate, windows
of this size, in proportion to the size of the room, gave
sufficient light. These lofty stories were built partly,
no doubt, to obtain an effect of grandeur, but also for a
practical purpose. In Italy, where there is great heat
during the day and miasma at night, windows and all
openings are kept carefully closed, except in the cool of the
evening or in the morning when they are opened to renew
the air. It was therefore necessary that the rooms should
be of sufficient capacity to enclose enough air for a day’s
consumption. In England we can have constant ventilation,
consequently our rooms need not be so lofty ; and in our dark
climate, windows reaching only halfway up the wall of the
room would give an effect not of grandeur but of dismalness.
We want all the light we can get, and from as high a point
in the room as possible.

The conditions of building in the two countries are wholly
different ; and in merely copying Italian architecture for
English use, our builders have lost its proportion and gran-
deur. In the different circumstances a different treatment
was required.

In giving some account of Renaissance architecture


--page 237

north of the Alps, we shall find interest and benefit not
so much in great palaces designed by learned architects
in imitation of those of Italy, as in smaller houses, where
the builders felt themselves at liberty to modify the style,
according to convenience and the old traditions of the
country.


--page 238


CHAPTER XI.


THE RENAISSANCE IN FRANCE.


F RANCE was the first country across the Alps whose
architecture was influenced by the new revival.
Even in the reign of Louis XII. (a.d. 1498-1515) there
are indications of the change. Under his successor, Francis
I., palaces and castles in the new style were built in every
part of the country. The constant intercourse with Italy,
the interest of the Court in art and its patronage of Italian
artists, who were then acknowledged masters in all the arts,
enriched the country, in the first half of the sixteenth
century, with examples of the new style, of a complete-
ness and correctness which was not seen in England and
Germany till nearly a century later. There is some evi-
dence which would almost make it appear as if the new
style had grown up independently and simultaneously in
France and Italy. There is said to be undoubted documen-
tary evidence that the town hall of Orleans, in which there
is a mingling of Classic features in a design otherwise
Gothic, was built in the fifteenth century.

But French Gothic was a living and vigorous style. It


--page 239

maintained a long struggle with its invader, and even
when the new style was accepted without question,
mediaeval features continued to characterise it and were
never wholly abandoned. By this union of the two styles
the genius of the French in art produced one of the most
charming forms of the Renaissance architecture, thoroughly
worked out and
finished, and ad-
mirably suited for
modern domestic
requirements.

One of the most
marked character-
istics which the
French Renaiss-
ance inherited from
the Gothic archi-
tecture of the
country, was the
tall pyramidal sla-
ted roofs, pecu-
liar to it among:
the Renaissance
styles of Europe.

A few examples
are found in Ger-
many, due in part
to French influence,
but the true char-
acteristic of German Renaissance and of German Gothic
houses is, that the front is a great broad gable with several
stories of windows in it.

These tall pyramidal slate roofs are found chiefly in
chateaux and mansions in the country ; sometimes also in
town houses. They are a legacy from the later Gothic



Fig. 75. CHATEAU DE THERY.



--page 240

style of the country, which it retains to the present day.
It will be remembered that in attempting* to give a rationale
of Gothic architecture, I showed that, while in England
the pointed arch bad in later Gothic become flattened, and
the roofs had been made flat in harmony with it, in France
pointed vaulting and pointed windows having been retained,
high steep roofs have been retained also. This habit was,
no doubt, encouraged by the quarries of beautiful slates
which almost every province of France possessed, durable
and thin, capable of being cut into any forms or worked into
any curves or angles and, when laid, forming a beautifully
even surface. The excellence of the material led the
builders to take a pride in their roofs and to make the most
of them, and to prefer slate roofs to gables, sometimes even
in their churches. In the treatment of the roofs lies the
chief charm of the pretty little Gothic Chateau de Thery,
which is here illustrated. It will be seen from this illus-
tration that these sloping or “hipped” roofs, as they are
technically called, are better suited than gables to the round
and octagonal towers and to the machicolations — the para-
pets projected on corbels, which we see here, leaving
openings for throwing stones and molten lead down on
besiegers — of mediaeval military architecture. In many
French buildings (e.g. the new building of the Louvre) these
pyramidal roofs are truncated so as to form a square plat-
form on the top surrounded by an ornamental railing.
Sometimes they terminated in a form like a chisel edge as
in the entrance tower of Jacques Coeur’s house at Bourges
(fig. 44, p. 154).

These tall roofs have lately become very fashionable in
England, partly because they express the Gothic tendency to
height, with which most of the architects are imbued ; no
doubt also, because they give a good deal of show for the
money. All about London now they break up the modest
roof-lines of the older architecture. They are apt to look


--page 241

pretentious here, as there is neither tradition nor convenience
to justify them, for they make the neighbouring chimneys
smoke, and when stuck on the top of houses already of
seven stories, they compel their chimneys to be carried so
high that they cannot be swept. They are dangerous
for fire. Constructed of wood and rising high above the
party-walls separating the houses, the flames spread with
the wind from one high roof to another. These high roofs
were, it is said, a chief cause of the destructiveness of the
great fire at Chicago, where this fashion apparently had
been adopted. On houses in the country they make hard
shiny black spots in the landscape, for our slates are not so
beautiful as the French.

Another feature which French Renaissance inherited
from the Gothic style of the country is, that the windows
have mullions and transoms. From an early period French
Gothic had given up the use of the pointed arch for domestic
buildings. The little French chateau (fig. 75) illustrates
this, as does also Jacques Coeur’s house at Bourges (fig.
44, p. 154), in which all the windows are square-headed,
except that of the chapel over the entrance, which is filled
with tracery and pointed, thereby fitting better the vault-
ing of the chapel ; also perhaps, because traceried windows
had come to be considered specially ecclesiastical features.

Mullioned and transomed windows continued for some
time a universal characteristic of French Renaissance.
They formed part of the original design of the Tuileries,
and of the Louvre, as we know from contemporary drawings
in Du Cerceau's book on Architecture. The stone mullions
and transoms are now removed, but a similar effect is
obtained in these and other French buildings by broad
divisions of wood occupying the same positions.

Another inheritance of French Renaissance from the



--page 242

mediaeval style was a castellated or semi-fortified character.
Since the invention of cannon the nobles found that their
castles had become useless as fortifications. They were
dark and inconvenient as dwellings, consisting of massive
towers at the angles with solid curtain-walls between,
enclosing the great tower or keep ; the only openings,
except in the highest stories, being small narrow slits,
which a man could not get through. Inside, the staircases
and passages were narrow and tortuous, so as to puzzle an
enemy if he got in.

With the new style came a new building impulse. King,
nobles, and commoners re-housed themselves with larger
accommodation, greater splendour, and above all, with
abundance of window light. A desire for abundance of
light in their dwellings characterised the style of this
period in France as well as the contemporary Tudor style
in England. It seems almost as if they expressed in tlieir
dwellings their delight in the light which they felt the new
learning had brought them ; possibly it was only a reaction
from the darkness which the necessities of defence had
hitherto compelled them to endure.

The castles being now useless as fortifications did not
require a garrison. But in rebuilding them their accom-
modation was not lessened. Larger and more splendid
rooms than the old ones were wanted, and the nobles
did not much diminish the number of their retainers.
They were a sign of power and importance, and the men-
at-arms continued in the house, rendering the old sort of
menial service of various kinds, in addition to their mili-
tary duties, which were now dispensed with. The tradition
remains to the present day; footmen and men-servants
being kept in great houses for show rather than for use.

In most castles the solid curtain-walls between the angle-
towers were pulled down, and on their sites ranges of well-
lit buildings were built, giving greatly increased accommoda-


--page 243

tion. But the angle towers were left. They gave some
accommodation, one dark vaulted room on each story ;
while the curtain-walls gave none except by the sheds
leant against them. It is a characteristic of almost every
period of architecture but our own, that any work of pre-
decessors which could be turned to use was never pulled
down. Possibly also, the nobles kept the towers as the
symbols of their former power.

These towers, thus left in the chateaux when they were
rebuilt and fitted for modern use, gave them the look of



fortified buildings, a character which was carried out in
the parts which were rebuilt, and also in the new chateaux
of the period. In both new and old, the moat or ditch of
water round the castle was retained, though it had ceased
to be useful for defence, from old habit or because it was
a symbol of former power and importance. The possession
of it was accounted a sign of signorial rights.

This process of remodelling old fortified places is well
illustrated by the house of Jacques Coeur at Bourges (fig. 76).


--page 244

He had bought for the site a portion of the old city walls
which had become disused in consequence of the extension
of the city. He pulled down the curtain-walls between the
towers, and replaced them by ranges of elegant buildings.
The towers he worked into the plan, remodelling them and
making them fit for habitation by inserting larger windows.
The greater thickness of the walls shown on the plan
distinguishes the old from the new buildings.

The narrow windows or loop-holes in such towers,
lighting each story, were usually in a tier, one above the
other. Though the openings were small on the outside,
they widened out inside into large deep bays in the thick-
ness of the walls. It was therefore easy to cut a wide gash
from top to bottom in the tower in which larger windows
were inserted. These were built in the new style, flanked
by pilasters which covered the junction of the new and
old masonry. As the opening had been made from bottom
to top, these pilasters were carried continuously through the
whole height of the tower one above the other ; there was
no mass of plain wall dividing the rows of windows in the
different stories as in Italian architecture.

These tiers of windows dividing the wall perpendicularly
through all the stories became a feature of the French
Renaissance. By enforcing perpendicular lines, they ex-
pressed the tendency to Gothic principles of design, which
influenced the builders more than the principle of dwelling
on the horizontal lines characteristic of Classic architecture.
This arrangement was adopted in new buildings.

The Chateau d’Azy-le-Rideau, in the department of Indre-
et-Loire (fig. 77), is one among innumerable examples of this
mode of treatment, though the amount of window obtained
is less than usual.

The spread of the new architecture in France was very
rapid. There was a rage for building in the beginning of
the sixteenth century. Architecture and the decorative arts

--page 245

CHATEAU D’AZY-EE-RIDEAU, INDRE-ET-LOIRE.


Fig. 77.


--page 246


--page 247

were matters of interest to king and people, as we see from
the wealth and favour given to Italian artists.

The palaces and chateaux then built are still the best in
France. Only in towns decayed and deserted do we find
houses older than this date, and however interesting
archteologically these may be, they are poor dwelling-houses
according to our notions. Chateaux and manor-houses were
everywhere of a charming grace and kindliness of aspect,
which does not suggest that oppression of the peasants for
the next two hundred years, which in the Revolution sent
so many of them up in flames.

In the earlier buildings of the reign of Francis I. Gothic
details still prevail. In the Chateau of Nantouillet., built by
his minister, Duprat, in 1520, the front is divided by Classic
pilasters and mouldings not attempting Classic proportion,
while the jambs and mullions of the windows have Gothic
mouldings and bases. The staircase has pointed windows
with tracery supported on mullions, which are shaped like
Classic balusters, and has vaulting of the most intricate
design, following the slope of the steps, the vaulting ribs
being curved in two planes. There are the usual indications
of an effete style ; no crudeness, but an attempt to excite a
sensation by intricate and wonderful workmanship.

The new style soon worked off all traces of Gothic form,
and frankly accepted the Classic orders and details, but it
was no slave to them. The spirit of freedom in which the
practice of Gothic had trained the builders prevented this.
The French genius in art used the materials of Italian
architecture with a freedom and power of invention which
formed out of them an original style. They did not
restrict themselves to the five orthodox orders, with their
fixed proportions and stereotyped capitals, which indeed
was an idea of later growth, hardly formulated at this time
even in Italy. They invented new forms of capitals almost


--page 248

as various as Gothic ones, and altered the proportions of
the columns and cornices to suit their buildings. To do
this well, implied genius and originality in art. A claim
for freedom and doing as we like in architecture is

justifiable only when
we have a power to
originate beauty, and
taste to restrain us in
its exercise. Other-
wise, it is better to be
content to copy.

French Renaissance
long retained the
Gothic feature of di-
viding the windows
by stone mullions and
transoms, along with
the Classic feature of
pilasters flanking their
sides. The house so
called of Agnes Sorel,
and the Episcopal
Palace at Sens (of
which drawings are
numerous), 1 as also the
little house at Orleans
(fig. 78), illustrate this
treatment.


Fig. 78. HOUSE WITH SHOP AT ORLEANS. This llOUSe with

its shop at Orleans
which I have put into perspective from Sauvageot’s
drawing, is a fair specimen of the fully developed Re-
naissance of Francis I. Gothic detail has disappeared ;
there is a reminiscence of it only in the form of the


1 See Fergusson, vol. iii. pp. 196, 197.




--page 249

windows with their mullions and transoms,' and in the
slender shafts supporting the arches of the door-ways,
though the arch mouldings are Classic. But the spirit
of the design is Gothic. It has the effect of decoration
spread over the surface rather than the opposition of solid
and void which is the principle of Classic. Instead of
void being placed over void, and solid over solid, which
is an essential rule of Classic, the two upper stories are
differently centred from the lower, but this suggests no idea
of weakness. As in Gothic architecture the upper stories
spring from the lower one, rather than rest on it. The
pilasters spring from corbels ; their weight is not carried
down to the ground, as it would be in true Classic. The
design is Gothic also in its irregularity and freedom, the
windows are of any size, and placed not symmetrically, but
in whatever position they are wanted. Symmetry is thought
of, but it is not paramount. For the sake of it the large
arch of the shop is drawn partly over the opening and
partly over the solid wall at the corner, so as to bring it
under the centre of the larger window, which is treated as
one of the centres of the front, with two pilasters on each
side of it. In all this there is more of Gothic than of Classic
motive ; a pleasing confusion — it would be too much to call
mystery — which makes us feel there is more in the design
than we see at first, sight, and makes this building, though
an unimportant one, a good example of the principle of the
Renaissance — the Gothic spirit revealing itself in Classic
forms.

The front of the Church of Saint-Etienne du Mont beside
the Panthe'on at Paris (fig. 23, p. 66) exhibits another and
a later development of French Renaissance. I have already
referred to it as a typical example of the union in Re-
naissance architecture of the Gothic spirit with Classic details.
The front seems to have been added to the already existing
church which shows itself through the traceried windows.


--page 250

The church, said to have been begun in 1537, is in the
interior one of the latest productions of Gothic. Though
worked out with Classic mouldings and ornament, it
illustrates Gothic lightness and aspiration better than
many Gothic buildings.

I have chosen this front for illustration, as exhibiting the
characteristics of the later Renaissance. There is no attempt
at restraint or refinement of line in the design, but there is
an effect of sumptuous picturesqueness, with an air of gaiety
and aspiration, which may well atone for the incongruities
for which Mr. Fergusson condemns it.

Some of the buildings at the commencement of the reign
of Francis I. (a.d. 1513) are without trace of Classic ad-
mixture. Before the end of his reign in 1547, palaces such
as Fontainebleau and the chateau of Madrid in the Bois de
Boulogne, now destroyed, had been built, and the Louvre
had been commenced, without a trace of Gothic in the
details. For other important buildings, although Italian
artists were employed to give designs, the native artists
and workmen seem to have taken a good deal of their
own way in carrying them out; while in less important
buildings, of which they were the designers, they merely
added to their old Gothic designs some touches of the new
manner which they had learned from the Italian masters.
They did this with such thorough knowledge of practical
requirements and feeling for art as to create a new and
beautiful variety of style, more interesting and more pro-
fitable for study than the correct Classic.

In the next century Roman infallibility in the province
of architecture had crushed out national characteristics and
individual freedom. But though this authority was formally
acknowledged, it was not obeyed. Gallic liberties were
asserted and maintained in architecture as in religion.

It is not within the scope of this book to give a com-


--page 251

plete history of French Renaissance architecture, or to
refer, except briefly, to the forms which it assumed in
succeeding reigns. Any one interested in the subject
will find information in the volume of Mr. Fergusson’s
book on the Renaissance styles, especially in the woodcuts
with which it is illustrated. I cannot, however, always
agree with Mr. Fergusson in his criticisms on these
styles.

The architecture of the time of Henry II. (1547-59)
had the purer Classic forms of the later style of his father,
covered with rich and beautiful ornament. A well-known
example is the south buildings of the court of the Louvre,
where Henry’s initial is united on the carved panels with
that of Diane de Poitiers.

The style of Charles IX. (1560-74) had many of the
characteristics of our own contemporary Elizabethan, an
outcome of the same spirit which delighted in quirks and
fancies, which took Classic features such as the projected
corner stones and carved them with bands and straps, made
columns and pilasters tapering outwards instead of inwards,
and finished them with grotesques for capitals. The world
was young again and was playing itself.

But the authority of the Classic style was ever reasserting
itself. The palace of the Tuileries, commenced by Catherine
de Medici in 1564, from the designs of Phillibert de Lorme,
is almost pure Classic, but French rather than Italian in
character.

In Henry IV.’s reign (1589-1610) architecture became
still more Classic. In the two great pavilions which he
added at each end of the fin^ade of the Louvre, he employed
great pilasters running through two stories. In the designs
of the gallery, which he commenced to connect the palace
with the Louvre, this range of great pilasters is continued,
surmounted by pediments alternately curved and straight-
sided. The design is mere external ornament, the windows


--page 252

being placed alternately under the centre of these pediments,
and in the spaces between them.

The architecture of the palace of the Luxembourg,
designed about 1611 by De Brosse, is better, inasmuch as
it accords with the internal arrangements. The order
ranges with each story. It is said that Catherine de’
Medici, for whom it was built, insisted that it should be a
copy of the Pitti Palace at Florence — not evidently of its
massive front of gigantic stones, but of the later buildings
towards the Boboli gardens, which it resembles in the
smaller and more orderly rustication with which its surface
is covered. A French character is given to the building
by the tall slated roofs, which are unknown in Italy.

During the long reign of Louis XIV. (1643-1715) the
authority of the Classic orders was unquestioned, but an
independent style grew up alongside of them, employed
chiefly in internal decorations. We know it as the style of
Louis Quatorze, and its influence on our upholstery has
continued to our own time. Those strange twisted carvings
like capital Gr’s interlocked, which we find on chiffoniers at
seaside lodgings, are the last dregs of it. Straight lines
and rectangles are the natural forms for a panelled door.
But in this style they were bent and curved and broke out
in flourishes. In one instance which I have seen, even the
window-bars which divided the window into small panes
were curved in wavy lines, so as to give the panes orna-
mental forms, in sympathy with the decoration of the room.
In French hands the style was graceful and elegant, but,
like the morals of the court whose palaces it adorned,
it was not pure. In religion, after due deference was paid
to the authority of the Church, society felt unrestrained
in luxury and morals ; and, in the architecture of the time,
“the Orders” having been duly acknowledged, usually
in some outside part where they did not interfere with
convenience, unrestrained liberty prevailed in the internal


--page 253

decorations, which, however, were always charming and
gay. One feature of these decorations is the prevalence of
white. We wonder now at finding oak carvings painted
white, and think it due to the barbarism of a subsequent
time ; but in France, and in this country also, it was so in-
tended from the first ; our laborious and expensive scraping
to show the surface of the oak being often quite opposed to
the intention of the original design.

The exterior architecture is handsome and elegant, but
dull. It is always on its good behaviour ; its first essential
is symmetry ; carried out not only to the remotest corner of
the building — the kitchen wing on one side the exact copy
of the stable wing on the other — but to the bridges and
summer-houses of the gardens, and miles away in the straight
alleys through the woods. The orders are scrupulously
correct. The decorations are strictly confined to Classical
subjects ; nymphs, gods and goddesses ; the representation
of a Frenchman of the period being permissible only on
condition of its being in Koman costume.

This style continued during the earlier part of the reign
of Louis XY. (1715-1774). A book of plans and designs
for chateaux, “De la distribution des Maisons de plaisance
et de la decoration des edifices en general,” published by
Jacques Francois Blondel (Paris, 1737-1738), an architect
of this time, throws much light on the habits and ideas of
the aristocracy. One of the most striking features to us
is the absence of servants’ accommodation. Occasionally,
in explaining a plan, the author states that servants’ rooms
are provided in the roofs ; but Classic authority had by
this time succeeded in flattening the roofs to the low Italian
pitch ; the rooms are miserable in size, and, with only slates
between them and the air, hot in summer, cold in winter.
No windows in the elevations give indication of their
existence ; the dignity of the architecture was far too im-


--page 254

portant a matter to be sacrificed for the sake of light and
air for servants.

The space is quite inadequate for the numberless servants
of a great French house. Doubtless, however, many of
them lived not in the house, but in the village beside it,
the near neighbourhood of which the seigneur no more felt
an intrusion on his privacy than we do the servants’ ac-
commodation of our houses, for it belonged to him, and only
his dependants lived in it. This custom of the servants of
a great house living not in it but in the neighbourhood still
survives in the colleges of Oxford and Cambridge.

The plans of these French chateaux indicate a life of which
the aim was display and pleasure. On the ground-floor
magnificent ranges of entertaining rooms ; on the upper
floor, the central feature is the lord’s bedroom with its ante-
chamber for those who attended his “levee,” and sometimes
a low rail like that across a chancel, making a sacred en-
closure round the bed, within which the specially favoured
were admitted while he was dressing. There is always a
“degagement” by which he could leave his room without
encountering those waiting for him in the antechambers.
The larger chateaux of this age had usually connected with
them a building, called the Trianon after that at Versailles,
the purpose of which was to allow a small select company
to disembarrass themselves of the crowd of guests in the
great house. It contained rooms for billiards and card
playing, a small kitchen for private dinners, and a couple
of bedrooms, one with a private cabinet for the lord.
“All these little apartments,” says Blondel, describing a
“Trianon,” of which he gives designs, “being for relaxa-
tion, nothing should be neglected to render the decoration
joyful and gallant. Here genius may take a spring and
abandon itself to the vivacity of its caprices, not as in the
apartments of parade, where she should restrain herself
within the most exact rules of propriety and good taste, and


--page 255

not fall into the unmeasured liberties of our modern sculp-
ture and ornament, which ought to be banished from these
all the more that true architects can scarcely tolerate them
in places such as I am describing.” “In the card-room
Indian and Chinese plants and figures may form part of the
decoration ; they are naturally suited to it, and it is in this
place only that in my view they should be admitted.”

Such determined efforts at pleasure produce a saddening
effect, which somehow seems to communicate itself to the
architecture, which is dull, in spite of its unmeasured licence.

In the latter part of the reign of Louis XY. the style
of architecture and decoration became simpler and more
severe. The same influence showed itself at the time in
England also, as in the refined and elegant forms of silver-
plate in the reigns of the early Georges. The appreciation
of Classic form became more accurate and the attempts to
imitate it more successful, if less interesting, as in the
Church of St. Genevieve at Paris, better known as the
Pantheon ; the building of which occupied the latter part
of the eighteenth century.

The troubles of the Revolution and the uncertainty which
preceded it were not favourable to architecture ; and, when
the country again became settled under the empire, taste had
become still more accurately Classic. The old Roman inven-
tion of inserting an arch between the columns was perceived
to be a mistake. In the Madeleine and the Bourse at Paris
the columns stand free, supporting the entablature, and
forming a colonnade round the walls of the building as in
a Greek temple.

The Gothic revival of our time has had little influence in
France, compared with what it has had in England. A few
churches have been built in the style which, though they
have most of them the merit, which ours seldom have, of


--page 256

being vaulted, are generally poor and weak in design.
Houses in the style are rare, and public buildings almost
unknown. At the same time, France has produced excellent
books on the old historical Gothic.

During the reign of Louis-Philippe, and in the earlier
days of the second empire, some houses were designed in
what is called the Neogrec style. Some of these are
interesting and beautiful ; not slavish copies of Greek
remains, but a new form of the style suited to modern
wants and showing invention and originality. But this
fashion, too, has passed, and the tendency now seems to be
to return to the earlier developments of the Renaissance
style of the country. Tall steep roofs had never been
wholly abandoned. They are a characteristic of the modern
street architecture. The galleries by which Napoleon III.
united the Tuileries to the Louvre exhibit this feature,
with a great dormer window on each side, exuberant in
decoration. Some of the hotels lately built near the
Champs-Elysees exhibit still earlier forms of French
Renaissance, occasionally even windows with stone mullions.

French architects generally show more knowledge and
training in their work than ours, except when they attempt
Gothic, in which their opportunities have been fewer and
their skill is inferior. Their houses are more complete in
style throughout than ours, for it is the custom there that
the architect designs and superintends not only the building
proper but the decorations and the furniture, which with us
are often left to the upholsterer. The French workmen, too,
are better-skilled than ours in art. Their Classic traditions
have not been broken, and though they do not profess them-
selves “art workmen,” they inherit a style, and give their
work an artistic character naturally and without effort, and
therefore cheaply.

It would be foolhardy to attempt to predict what will be


--page 257

the future style of domestic architecture in France ; for
there, as with us, the style is determined in each instance
by the taste and skill of the individual architects. The
new buildings of the Palace of Justice at Paris, designed
by M. Le Due (not M. Viollet-le-Duc, the author of the
excellent Dictionary of Gothic Architecture), exhibit an
original treatment of Classic, refined and almost Greek
in character. Other instances, especially some modern
chateaux and hotels outvie the richest examples of the
old Renaissance in exuberance of ornament and curved
forms. There seems little prospect at present that a
single style will prevail over the country at one time,
gradually growing, or changing as new influences affect it,
as was the case with the old historical styles. It seems more
likely that we may see what has already happened in cos-
tume and ladies’ dress, which are governed no longer by
tradition, but by passing fashions. But the fashions in
architecture, however frequently changing, will probably
keep within the limits of the Classic style, which has for
three centuries been the style of the country.


--page 258


CHAPTER XU.


THE RENAISSANCE IN GERMANY AND THE LOW COUNTRIES.


T he new light of the Renaissance in art came to
Germany later than to France. Its first glimmer-
ings came through the painters, who crossed the Alps
into the north of Italy to study the works of the
great contemporary Italian school. The elder Holbein
(b. 1498, d. 1559) was one of the earliest. Albert Diirer
(b. 1471, d. 1528) was in Yenice in the year 1506, but
the Renaissance influence which these and others brought
hack extended no farther than their paintings, in which
Classical backgrounds begin to appear.

Many years elapsed before the new spirit began to affect
architecture. It showed itself first about 1520, in ecclesi-
astical palaces and bishops’ monuments ; for the bishops
were naturally in constant communication with Italy and
looked to it as a source of light in this as in other matters.
The parts of Germany which remained Roman Catholic
adopted the Renaissance architecture earlier than those
which became Protestant.

The old part of the palace at Dresden was built in 1530.


--page 259

By the middle of the century the new style had begun to
spread rapidly.

Like other Kenaissance styles the German inherited the
features of the Gothic of the country. The special charac-
teristic of German domestic Gothic was a tendency to give
importance, by ornament and great size, to the gables.
Sometimes they were covered with tracery worked on the
surface in stone or in brick. The two gables from Nurem-



Pig. 79. Fig. 80.

GABLES AT NUREMBERG.


berg (figs. 79 and 80) show a pretty treatment in brick, by
means of small projections or buttresses terminating in
little Gothic arches. The chimney is placed not on the
apex, but on the side, so as not to destroy the triangular
form of the gable.

But the most usual form was the stept gable. Instead of
the gable following the line of the roof and sloping with it
to the apex, it was carried up above it, and diminished by
several great steps or intakes. These steps were ornamented
with tracery, sometimes pierced where they projected above
the roof to give them greater lightness and play of light.


--page 260

These gables had usually several stories in their height.
They were the features in the building of most interest to
the designers ; the chief field for ornament ; in towns they
were towards the street. These characteristics the German
Renaissance inherited, changing the Gothic ornaments and
details into Classic ones.

This process is well illustrated by the accompanying
drawing of part of a street in Munster (fig. 81), which has
already been given, but is inserted here for convenience of
reference. The taller house is a typical example of late
Gothic, though it has lost something of its Gothic character,
from the removal of the mullions and tracery of the windows.
The lower part is without ornament, but from the cornice
level the design springs upwards with true Gothic aspira-
tion. The stepping of the gables is disguised somewhat by
the ornamental pillars or pinnacles, as compared with the
simple steps of the gable of the house farther off, part of
which the drawing shows.

The Renaissance house is similar in design. The arcade
of pointed arches probably belongs to an earlier building, of
which this portion had been left when the house was rebuilt,
as it is a portion of the continued arcade of the street. As
in the Gothic house, the lower stories are plain, and the
ornamentation commences at the cornice level. This
gable also is stept, but the steps are (disguised by- being
filled up with scrolls. The horizontal lines are more
enforced ; the chief characteristic of Classic architecture, as
compared with Gothic. There is not the same impression
of aspiration, though Gothic influence survives in the little
spikes or pinnacles, but there is more ease and gaiety.

The general effect of this gabled architecture is shown by
the accompanying drawing of one of the streets of Landshut
(fig. 82). It contains both Classic and Gothic houses, but the
effect of the two is so similar that we hardly distinguish them.

This mode of building a street, by setting the gable ends


--page 261

--page 262

Fig. 81.


HOUSES AT MUNSTER, WESTPHALIA.

--page 263

--page 264



Fig, 82 . STREET IN LANDSHUT, BAVARIA.


--page 265

towards it, is unpractical and inconvenient. It necessitates
a gutter between each house, which can have no overflow
except at the ends, and, if it leaks, leaks into the houses.
If the chimneys are in the party-walls, which is often the
most convenient position for them, they must rise from this
gutter to the height of the ridge, with a risk of smokirig,
and expensive to build. There is danger besides, of fire
spreading from one roof to another, when there is no solid
wall between the houses rising higher than the roof. For
these reasons the practice has been gradually given up.

In the drawing of the Carolinen-Strasse, at Nuremberg
(frontispiece), it will be seen that though some of the houses
have their gables to the streets, in most of them the cornice
is to the street, and the gable between the houses.

An effect of as great or even greater picturesqueness is
obtained by this means. It gives the expanse of roof broken
up by little windows, characteristic of the Nuremberg houses,
as well as smaller gables or dormer windows, toward the
street. These were indispensable to a German house, for
the stories in these great roofs were used as store-places,
and for the periodical washings of the family. The great
stores of linen which each house possessed made the dis-
comfort of a family washing necessary only about every
three months. The same custom still prevails in Germany
and Holland ; the extensive floor space of the stories of the
roof was used for washing, mangling, and drying ; and to
facilitate the last process, the little windows in the roofs
were opened so as to create a through draft. Hence a
derrick projecting over the street was necessary in each
house, as may be seen in the drawing, for hoisting up or
down the linen as well as the stores. Some part of the
space was usually devoted to keep these. Other portions
were occasionally used for drying apples, the produce of the
family orchards.

Nuremberg, above all other cities, gives one the impression


--page 266

of a city of the Middle Ages ; yet this impression is pro-
duced by houses Classic in date and details. A Gothic city
existed before the present one, as the two great Gothic
churches testify, and the view in the Nuremberg Chronicle,
in the year 1498. The Nassauer House (fig. 50, p. 177), and
some others remain. But most of the streets have been rebuilt
in Classic style, and so handsomely and conveniently that
nothing would be gained by rebuilding it in the present day.

Here, as elsewhere in the early Renaissance, the essential
spirit of the style is Gothic. It has Gothic freedom and pictur-
esqueness and aspiration,
though doubtless the good
burghers thought they were
carrying out true Classic.
The words were Classic, but
they were embodied in the
old language. The builders
were trained to familiarity
with them, and used them
as their natural mode of
expression, but they had
not changed their nature ;
the Classic words express
Gothic feelings and ideas.

It is this unconsciousness, this perfect naturalness, which
gives the charm to these streets. They are the natural out-
come of the circumstances, and are entitled to be considered
examples of a true style. (Frontispiece.)

There is a character and picturesqueness about the Nurem-
berg houses which gives a charm even to those in the poorer
districts, like those in my sketch beside the river, fig. 83.



Fig. 83 .


HOUSES ON THE PEGNITZ,
NUREMBERG.


In her Renaissance style Germany retained another
characteristic of her Gothic architecture, the projecting bow
windows, not rising from the ground, but hung out from


--page 267

the upper stories ; which, as the illustrations show, occur
so frequently in the houses. Almost every house in Nurem-
berg has one such, usually attached to the principal dwelling-
room of the house. That at St. Sebald’s Parsonage, opposite
the church, is a beautiful Gothic example, well known from
photographs and drawings. There is a pretty little one on
the centre of the Nassauer House (fig. 50, page 177), facing
St. Lawrence Church. In the
Renaissance houses of Nurem-
berg they were usually square
in plan, with a curved Classic
pediment over them. This
sketch from F reiburg in Breis-
gau (fig. 84), is a late Gothic
example of a square projecting
oriel. Sometimes they were
continued through the several
stories, as in the house to the
right in the drawing: of the


m _

Carolinen - Strasse, (Frontis-
piece, and the house at Wurz-
burg, illustrated in page 273).

But the form of projecting
windows, peculiarly charac-
teristic of German house
architecture, is the Erker or
Eckfenster , a lantern or turret, pierced with windows all
round, projecting from the corner of the house. The idea
doubtless sprang from the angle turrets of Gothic fortifica-
tion, of which the little house at Boppart (fig. 49, p. 176), is
an illustration. The idea is fully developed in the beautiful
example of late Gothic date at Augsburg (fig. 48, page 169).
On the corner of the Bishop’s house at Wurzburg (fig. 86)
there is a beautiful and picturesque example, dating from
the last quarter of the sixteenth century. It has carved on



Fig 84. ORIEL AT FREIBURG IN BREISGAU.


--page 268

it the arms of' Bishop of Julius who founded the university
about 1590. It is Classic in the detail of the cornices, hut
Gothic in its picturesqueness as well as in the mullions and
transoms dividing the windows. The other windows of
the house have Gothic interpenetrating mouldings, even
that over the pretty little Classic doorway with its fluted
Corinthian columns. The Classic architecture seems to
have been employed on the parts intended to be specially
beautiful and ornamental. Where use alone was aimed at,
the familiar Gothic was thought good enough. The mas-
sive arched doorway, on the flank of the Bishop’s house,

seems an alteration of the
eighteenth century.

The drawing of the house
opposite the Cathedral at
Augsburg (fig. 9, page 40),
gives a later example of
these corner turret win-
dows. The ogee form of
the corbels supporting the
turrets, as well as the
flattened arches, seem to
indicate that the building
dates from the eighteenth
century. Sometimes the builders made projections at the
ground-level, as the little inn at Ivriegshaben near Augsburg
(fig. 85) shows. In date and details it is late Classic, but
there is a picturesqueness, I must even say dodginess, in
the arrangement of the structure which ought to charm the
heart of a modern Gothic architect, and to convince him
that the characteristics, which he loves so much, are not
peculiar to his favourite style.

These projections from the general wall surface of the
houses give great interest and picturesqueness to the streets
of Nuremberg and other German towns. They relieve the



Fig. 85. INN AT KRIEGSHABEN, NEAR
AUGSBURG.


--page 269

--page 270

Fig. 86.


BISHOP’S HOUSE, WURZBURG.




--page 271

dull monotony, which is the chief characteristic of our
modern towns, and they make the houses pleasanter to live
in. Our modern building Acts forbid them, partly with a
view to uniformity and regularity, which it seems their
great object to encourage, partly because the encroachment
they make on the street is supposed to be an evil, and partly
perhaps because the framers of these Acts seem to have
thought that the small amount of skill in building required
for their construction was beyond what modern builders
could with safety be allowed to attempt ; for they are for-
bidden by the London building Acts, even where the house
is set back from the street and they do not project over the
roadway.

Another characteristic of the Renaissance architecture of
Germany, which is also found in her Gothic, is the arrange-
ment of the ground-floor in the houses, and the uses to
which it was put. It was not generally used for living
rooms or bed-rooms. As in Italy, people seem to have
preferred to live not on the ground, but one story at least
above it. So the ground-floor was left to be utilised as
best it might. Sometimes it was occupied as cellars, or
for storing farm produce. When, as is still frequently the
case in German towns, the merchant’s house was also his
place of business, the ground-floor served as the magazine
for storing and selling his goods. Sometimes it was un-
appropriated, left open to the street as in the Neu-Munsterhof
at Wurzburg (fig. 87), and provided with stone benches
for public convenience ; or the front part of it, as at Munster
(fig. 81, page 261), appropriated as a covered arcade for
foot passengers.

The picturesque house in the same city (fig. 88, page 273)
shows a characteristic feature of south German house
arrangement in the great door, wide and high enough
to admit a loaded waggon to the court behind, with the
smaller door beside it for access to the house. Sometimes


--page 272

almost the whole of this ground-floor was occupied witn a
large hall provided with stone benches, generally open to
the public, from the inner end of which ascended the great
staircase to the house proper, which occupied the floor above.


Fig. 87. NEU-MUNSTERHOF, WURZBURG.

A special characteristic of German house architecture, is
the imperfect development, and small importance of the
chimneys, as compared with those in French and English


--page 273

1 louses. This arose from the use of close stoves instead of
the great open fireplace, common in France and with ns.
This feature also is an inheritance from Gothic times, for
stoves of Gothic date still exist in Germany. There is one
such in the Castle
of Landshut,
another in tlie
Castle of Coburg,
made of cast-
iron, and a very
splendid one in
the Rathhaus at
O c h s e n f u r t h
formed of mould-
ed tiles coloured
and glazed.

Another feature
of German house
architecture is
the frequency,
especially in the
northern pro-
vinces, of houses
wholly con-
structed of wood.

The house at
Hildesbeim, of
which I give an
illustration, for
which I am in-
debted to the
kindness of the


Fig. 88.


HOUSE AT WURZBURG.


proprietors of ‘The Builder,’ is a notable example (fig. 90).
It has, I believe, been destroyed by fire, but others similar
still exist in that city and in other towns in the neighbour-
YOL. I. T



--page 274

hood. It was constructed entirely of chestnut — not like the
usual post-and-pan houses of other parts of Germany, England,
and northern France, of a wooden framework filled in with
plaster panels — It dates probably from about the year 1620,
and is similar in its construction and in the ornament of
its carved panels to some houses in the Rue de la Grande
Horloge at Rouen. But in the tendency the design shows
to dwell on the gables and make the most of them, and in

the imperfect development of its
chimneys it is thoroughly Ger-
man ; the great gable is peculiarly
German in character. Except as an
ornamental feature, the second small
gable round the corner has no
raison d'etre.

This house exhibits another
feature, which so far as I ain aware
is not found in houses of the period
in any other district. The upper
windows, as will be observed, have
sliding sashes. These unmullioned
windows are so completely part of
the design that it is improbable
that they are an alteration of later
date, especially as sash windows are
found in other houses of the date
in the same district. Sliding sash
windows, which have now become a British institution and
an important element of English comfort, came to us, like
our broad dining tables, with Dutch William from Holland.
But they seem to have been in use in north Germany before
the Dutch adopted them.

A feature of German architecture which strikes an
Englishman at first as strange, are the bulbous protu-
berances formed of copper which occasionally occur on the



AV. 89. I! ATHHAU3, MANNHEIM.


--page 275
--page 276


Fig. 9u.


WOODEN HOUSE AT HILDESHEIM.





--page 277

roofs. The tower of the Rathhaus at Mannheim (fig. 89)
terminates in one of these ; the lower part of this roof, where
the square gathers into the octagon, is of slate. The tower
itself is late Classic, not unpicturesque. Much more marked
examples are to be found ; small spires blossoming into a
string of them, like tulip bulbs stuck at intervals on a stick.
They are not a peculiarly German feature : we all know
the remarkable specimens on the Cathedral of Antwerp.
They may not be correct architecture, probably they are
not ; but they are quaint and interesting and picturesque,
and the green colour of the copper is always beautiful.

It has been impossible within my limits, to trace the
successive developments of the Renaissance style in each
province of Germany. Those who wish to gain this know-
ledge will find the information, if they can read German,
in Wilhelm Liibke’s excellent work, ‘Die Neuere Baukunst in
Deutschland,’ published at Stuttgart in 1873, collected with
true German thoroughness, and amply illustrated by excellent
woodcuts. My aim has been merely to give some notion of
the Renaissance style in Germany, and to show that here,
as elsewhere, its peculiar development was influenced and
determined by the native Gothic style of the country.

The Renaissance architecture of Germany has not usually
been considered to have great artistic merit, or much
interest. Mr. Fergusson says of it (vol. iii. p. 336) : “The
Germans were not more successful in their attempts at
Secular architecture during the period of the Renaissance,
than in their Ecclesiastical buildings. The architect wanders
in vain through the capitals of Germany in hopes of finding
something either so original or so grand that it should dwell
on the memory, even if it does not satisfy the rules of taste.”
“Nothing (p. 341) can be more unsatisfactory or less interest-
ing than the history of German architecture during the
Renaissance period*”


--page 278

This is partly true if domestic architecture has no interest
except in palaces where vast sums are expended. I think,
however, that architecture may be interesting and worthy
of study even in small houses for middle class people. The
German nobles were not generally fortunate in their palace
building. In the seventeenth century in their palaces, as
in their government and their manners, they attempted
clumsy imitations of the glory and elegance of the Court
of Versailles, alien from the best characteristics of the
people. But Mr. Fergusson’s assertion (p. 341) that,
“during the three centuries of the Renaissance period, the
German nobles built no city palaces to be compared in any
way with those which adorn every town in Italy, nor one
single country residence that can match in grandeur the
country seats that are found in every county in England,”
can be refuted by a number of examples. Liibke’s book
gives numerous examples of nobles’ castles, and especially
of town houses, which in their own way may fairly compare
with those of other countries.

But the German race has never been remarkable for the
display of the highest qualities of art, either in colour or in
form. Even her greatest painters cannot properly be called
colourists, like the great Italians. Nor is their work re-
markable for beauty of form ; their merit lay rather in
depth of feeling and an elevated tone of truth and morality.
The Renaissance architecture, which the Germans got from
Italy, lost in their hands its beauty of line and perfection of
proportion; nor did it, as in France, acquire a special grace
and refinement of its own. It has a want of elegance,
sometimes even an air of clumsiness. But it has a pictur-
esqueness and variety, which make German towns more
interesting than any others in Europe, and truth and
common sense, which is always satisfactory.

These old German streets are certainly more interesting
and beautiful than those which we are producing in our


--page 279

modern towns, and yet they contain no marvels of art, such
as we should be incapable of producing. I have attempted
in a former chapter to give some of the reasons why we do
not produce such streets.

I have no intention of attempting to give an account
and history of the Renaissance style in other countries of
Europe, though in some of these, especially Belgium and the
Low Countries, more artistic specimens of architecture are to
he found than in Germany. Holland, though she produced
a notable school of painters, seems to have expended little
invention on domestic architecture. The houses are all
of brick. The earlier ones have mullioned windows and
simple stept gables ; a type which prevails generally in the
Low Countries. The later houses in Holland, as at Amster-
dam, are all of one type, not unlike the older London red-
brick houses, the idea of which seems to have been derived
from them ; but the variations in the Dutch houses though
very slight, the life which the water and boats of the canals
and the trees which line their sides give them, make the
canals of Amsterdam much more interesting than London
streets. The style of the interiors is a mild echo of that of
Louis Quinze. They are roomy and the workmanship is
excellent. In one I visited, the owner told me that the
white paint of the drawing-room had not been renewed
for a hundred years.

Belgium, perhaps in consequence of the Celtic blood
of the people, had more art ; this was evident in Gothic
times, and still more during the Renaissance. The deco-
rations, especially of the houses and churches, such as the
hammered brass-work, or Dinanderie, so called from the
town of Dinan, where it was largely made ; the stamped
leather for covering walls, and the ornamental sculpture
in marble, rival those of Italy, whose type they followed.


--page 280

Italian influence was strong and direct. It is difficult of
some ornamental work to say, at first sight, whether it is
Italian or from the Low Countries. But native genius also
gives itself free scope. In the carved wood pulpits of the
great churches it revelled in a freedom which sometimes
exceeded the hounds of taste and the capacity of the
material.

In Renaissance architecture the Low Countries produced
a variety of their own, more refined and imaginative than
the German. The town hall of Antwerp, erected by Cor-
nelius de Yriendt in 1581, is a charming building; the
open loggia under the roof gives interest and grandeur by
its shadow, and reminds one of the similar feature in
Florentine palaces.

To this building the town hall of Amsterdam is a melan-
choly contrast. No expense is spared ; it is of gigantic size,,
and built of stone in a country where every stone had to be
brought from a long distance ; but the art to direct the ex-
penditure was wanting. It is dull, heavy, and uninteresting.
No fancy is displayed, and the proportions are bad. Am-
sterdam was rich, but not artistic; she did not care for art,
and did not know it when she saw it. She spent the money
for brag, not for art, and got what she wanted. In this, she
much resembles ourselves. We are anxious to be artistic,
because it is the proper thing, and are, therefore, quite willing
to spend money on it, but we do not quite know how.

In Belgium the influence of its Spanish rulers gave
greater sumptousness and magnificence to architecture and
the decorative arts ; for the Spaniards, in those days, had
amongst them artists as great as any in Europe, and they
had lordly tastes. Under Spanish influence and to the
order of Spaniards the most splended stampt-leather, the
richest metal work, the most magnificent stained glass were
executed.

The group of’ houses in the Market Place, Brussels (fig. 91),


--page 281
--page 282


HOUSES IN THK MARKET PLACE, BRUSSELS.


Fig. 91.



--page 283

shows this Spanish influence. They exhibit, in a degree
rarely attained, the qualities of richness and sumptuousness.
There is a playfulness about them which is very charming.
Every house has a character of its own. That built by
some admiral, with its gable like the stern of his ship,
is specially picturesque and interesting.

Great artistic skill is needed, when houses are mere tall
narrow strips like these, to give them any artistic effect. We
give up the attempt and make our houses by the foot
run, and cut them off in lengths as required.

It was not always so with us, as we shall see in the next
chapter.



l'ig. 92.


OLD HOUSE AT LUCERNE.


--page 284

CHAPTER XIII


THE RENAISSANCE IN ENGLAND


HE new architecture, in anything approaching the


purity of the Italian style, took root in England as
the accepted style for ordinary buildings later than in any
of the countries I have already spoken of.

The English are a conservative people. The native
style was strong and vigorous, sensible and suited to do-
mestic wants, understood by the builders and liked by the
people. They were proud of its achievements in buildings
like King’s College Chapel at Cambridge, and of the new
magnificence which it had added to almost every church in
the country, and they had no thought of such revolutionary
change in their habits as the adoption of the new style would
have involved. Till our own day, when the Great Exhi-
bition of 1851 destroyed the last remnants of traditional
art remaining in England, it survived still in some remote
parts as the style of village tradesmen, for unimportant
buildings such as cottages or barns.

Yet there exist still in England pure examples of Classic
art, dating from an earlier period than any such in Germany


--page 285
--page 286


Fig. 9 1 . LONGLEAT, WILTSHIRE. FROM AN OLD PRINT.




--page 287

or even in France. The tomb of Henry VII. in his chapel
at Westminster, dating from the first years of his successor’s
reign which began in 1509, is the work of the Italian Tor-
rigiano, and bears no trace of English Gothic influence. In
the Rolls Chapel, Chancery Lane, there is a monument by
the same artist to Dr. John Young, Master of the Rolls,
who preceded Sir Thomas More in that office.

The ornamental parts of the stained-glass windows of
King’s College Chapel at Cambridge, are Classic in design,
but these also are foreign importations, and had no influence
on the general architecture. The fittings of the chapel, the
altar-screen and stalls are also Classic ; but the old tradition
of English art was too strong for such small and isolated
examples to make any impression on it. They remained
mere foreign importations. By the quarrel between the
King and the Pope in 1533, when Cranmer pronounced
the divorce of the marriage between Henry and Catherine,
Italian ideas in this as in other spheres were deprived in
England, as in the Protestant parts of Germany, of the
influence they would otherwise have had.

The Classic style was first introduced into the architec-
tural construction of buildings, apart from mere decorative
adjuncts, in Elizabeth’s reign (1558-1603), in Longleat in
Wiltshire; it is said, by John of Padua, between 1567 and
1597.

The accompanying view of this house (fig. 93) I copied
from an old print, for the purpose of showing the arrange-
ment of the gardens, which are now destroyed. It does
not accurately represent the present condition of the house.
The square projecting bays are in reality wider and flatter
than shown ; their cornices are of pure Classic contour,
without the corbels shown in the drawing, and the pilasters
are broader and shorter in proportion. The aprons under
the windows are different in form. The great door as it
exists now is more purely Classic in character. It has only


--page 288

one column on each side, a broken Italian pediment the full
width of the door, with a shield in the centre ; but this
looks like a later alteration made when the terrace leading
to it was destroyed to give space for a carriage-drive to the
door, and the pTesent great flight of steps made leading
directly to it. In its essential features the building is late
English Gothic, ornamented with a few Classic details, and
so little impression had these made, and so thoroughly did
the art of the country remain Gothic in principle that
this drawing of a much later date Gothicises even its Classic
features.

To the influence of an Italian designer we probably owe
the pilasters of the bays, with their entablature and cornice,
which are designed in the actual building in excellent Classic
proportions. In the spaces left between these are inserted,
instead of the round arch of Classic architecture, English
mullioned and transomed windows, obviously not due to the
suggestion of an Italian artist, but to the English master
mason of the period. This seems a scarcely adequate result
for the employment of an artist specially brought from
Italy. But in England as in France the Italian artists
found a sphere for their art in the fittings and sculpture of
the internal decorations. The external building was wisely
left to the skill of the native workmen, who knew how to
build to suit English habits and the English climate.

In the time of King James the authority of the Classic
orders had become an accepted article of faith, and a part of
the ordinary building style of the country. This was due
in some degree to the influence of the new literature. The
Classic .orders were part of the new light which the Re-
naissance brought to mankind. The treatise of Vitruvius
became the Bible of architecture. In it, and other books,
and in buildings abroad, the new art was studied by many
gentlemen, who doubtless tried, as county gentlemen some-


--page 289

times try now, to get tlieir workmen to carry out their
ideas. A great building like Longleat would train many
workmen, who, regarding what they had there learned as
the newest light on art, would repeat it on the first oppor-
tunity. These new ideas were adopted, as new or foreign
words are taken into a language, of which the construction
remains unchanged. So the principles and construction of
the style remained English. The workmen accepted the
Classic features of columns, entablature, and mouldings, but
they did not catch the Classic spirit or ideas.

The process of development was irregular, being de-
pendent on the knowledge of the new architecture which
each designer happened to have attained, so that the greater
or less purity of the Classic details in a building is no sure
test of its date. The result in the Elizabethan and Jacobean
styles is very different from pure Classic, and was shocking
to those who regarded the five orders as the standard of
truth. When Classic architecture became generally known
and acknowledged in authority, the new style was ridiculed
as King James’ Gothic. But it was the natural development
of the circumstances, and is fairly, entitled to be called a
national style.

It was full of the quirks and fancies, which, as the
literature of the time shows, occupied the minds of people
in that generation. It delighted in abundance of window
light, as a reaction against the small narrow windows,
hitherto rendered necessary by the conditions of defence,
as if the builders wished to reproduce in their dwellings
the new intellectual light.

The drawings (figs. 94 and 95), for which I am indebted
to the kindness of the proprietors of ‘The Graphic,’ of an
interior in Lime Street, pulled down by the Fishmongers’
Company in 1876, show a fair example of the new styde
which was formed by the union of the Classic ideas with the
old native architecture. The screen between the two rooms


--page 290

(fig. 94) is according to the common Classic recipe — the
round arch inserted between the columns and lintel, 1 hut
the workman has carved it out in his own way and has
put his own ideas into it, as in the consoles of the frieze,
which are after no Classic model, but of English growth.
But there is no Classic authority for the design of the great
chimney-piece (fig. 95). Classic columns and mouldings
are used, but instead of the Classic principle of column
resting upon column, massive below and getting lighter as
it rises, the design springs upwards in great corbels, and
the two columns in the upper part are supported, and
supported without any sense of weakness, by the single one
below. This lower column is of a form for which there is no
Classic authority. Instead of its weight pressing down on
the ground it seems to spring from it. The form is similar
to that of a baluster. It occurs in French architecture, hut
it is a special note of the Elizabethan and Jacobean styles.

Classic architecture in anything like purity of style was
first introduced into England by Inigo Jones. An excellent
life of him, which by careful research brings out many new
facts, was published in 1848 by the Shakespeare Society,
written by their Secretary, Mr. Peter Cunningham. From
this I shall state briefly the main facts of his career as an
architect. He was born in 1573, the son of Inigo Jones,
Clothworker, living in the parish of St. Bartholomew-the-
less, in West Smithfield, London. His father (a native, it
is thought, of Wales) was badly off when Jones was a lad of
sixteen, as there is record that he had difficulty in paying a
debt of £80. He died in 1597, when Inigo was in his
twenty-fourth year, leaving debts, but apparently little pro-
perty. Inigo, it is said, had been bound apprentice to a
joiner — Ben Jonson ridiculed him as a joiner — in any case

1 The two .arches in the screen were not of the same date, the one nearer the
chimney-piece was a later addition, probably about Queen Anne’s time. Its detail
was more Classical than the earlier arch.



Fig. 94. INTERIOR OF AN OLD HOUSE IN LIME STREET, LONDON.


--page 291
--page 292
--page 293
--page 294






CHIMNEY-PIECE IN OLD HOUSE IN LIME STREET, LONDON.



--page 295

no bad training for an architect. He was early distin-
guished, his pupil Webb tells us, for his skill in drawing
and designing and in landscape painting. He went to Italy
wh ile young, but at what time is uncertain. “Being natu-
rally inclined,” he says in his book on Stonehenge, “in my
younger years to study the arts of design, I passed into foreign
parts to converse with the great masters thereof in Italy,
where I applied myself to search out the ruins of those
ancient buildings which, in despite of time itself and violence
of barbarians, are yet remaining. Having satisfied myself
in these, and returning to my native country, I applied my
mind more particularly to architecture.” Christianus IV.,
King of Denmark, Webb tells us, sent for him out of Italy,
where, especially at Venice, he had resided many years.
His stay in Denmark, Webb says, was long. In 1604-5.
when in his thirty-second year, he had returned to England,
where he was employed by the Queen of James I., Anne of
Denmark, the sister of Christianus, along with Ben Jonson,
to produce a Masque at the Court at Whitehall.

During the succeeding years there are records of his
being occasionally similarly employed, his share in the work
being to design the scenery and dresses. Drawings still
exist of the figures and characters which he prepared for
these occasions.

In 1610, Prince Henry appointed him Surveyor of Works
in his newly established household, in which year he em-
ployed him in devising the scenery of a masque. He held
this office till the Prince’s death in 1612, when he went again
into Italy, as we know from an entry in his copy of
‘Palladio,’ dated “Vicenza, Mundaie the 23rd of September,
1613.” Entries in his sketch-books show that he was at
Rome, Naples, and Vicenza in 1614. In 1615 he returned
to England to take possession of the office of Surveyor of
the Works, the reversion of which the King had promised
him. The office gave him sufficient employment in superin-


--page 296

tending tlie repairs of the King’s numerous manor-houses
and palaces, in arranging for royal progresses, and occasion-
ally in devising scenes and machinery for masques and en-
tertainments at Court, which were the occasion of a deadly
quarrel between him and Ben Jonson.

In January 1629, the old Banqueting-house at Whitehall
was burnt down, and Jones was commissioned to build a
new one, the first stone of which was laid in June of the
same year, and the building finished in March 1622. By
an account preserved in the Audit Office, it appears that the
basement was of Oxfordshire stone, cut into rustick on the
outside ; the upper part of Northamptonshire stone, and the
balusters of Portland. As the whole of the present building is
of Portland stone, it must have been refaced at a later period.

In 1620 he received the King’s commands to investigate
Stonehenge. From “some few undigested notes,” which
he had left, Webb published a treatise which declared that
Stonehenge was a temple of the Tuscan order, raised by
the Romans, and consecrated to the god Coelus, the origin
of all things ; an idea possibly suggested to suit the views of
“the wisest fool in Europe.”

In 1613 he commenced the chapel at Lincoln’s Inn, which
was consecrated in 1623. The cloisters under it were in-
tended as a place for the lawyers to meet their clients. This
work is specially interesting, as showing the hold the
old style still had, and the architect’s knowledge of it.
Notwithstanding its Doric columns and pilasters, from
which the Gothic arches spring, it is able work. There was
a rumour, I hope unfounded, that the Benchers actually
proposed to destroy this piece of history, by “restoring”
the chapel into correct Gothic.

About this time Jones 1 built the beautiful water-gate

1 This has boon doubted. There is a record that it was built by Stone, a builder
at the time, but Jones may have given the designs. It looks like his work, and in
style resembles the gate at the Botanical Gardens at Oxford, which he designed.







--page 297

--page 298







y '9- 96. YORK GATE. A LANDING-PLACE ON THE THAMES.



--page 299

to the town house of Yilliers, Duke of Buckingham, still
standing at the foot of Buckingham Street (fig. 96). The
view shows it from the land side. A flight of steps under
the centre arch descended to the water. On the river side
the base has been buried under the new embankment.
Perhaps some day the earth which conceals it might be
removed, and a pond made before it, which, now that
the river which once washed it is far removed, would
suggest its original purpose. It is one of the few build-
ings which remains as it came from his hand ; untouched
save by time, which has given it colour and interest, and, if
it has worn and softened the mouldings, still lets us trace
his actual work. May it be spared from the restorer’s or
the destroyer’s hand ! 1

His next important works were the great west portico
of old St. Paul’s, and the Queen’s house at Greenwich. St.
Paul’s was in a state of decay ; the King and Laud wished
him to rebuild it completely, and his portico was intended
as an instalment of the new building. The nave of old
St. Paul’s had been long used as a lounge, for gossiping, for
servants seeking places, and for people unable to afford a
dinner, who were said to dine with Duke Humphrey,
believed to have been buried there, though his tomb has
since been identified at St. Albans. The new portico was
intended to provide this public accommodation outside
the church; and, to make room for it, Jones removed the
Church of St. Gregory, which stood in front of it, in a
somewhat high-handed manner, for which he had after-
wards to answer.

The Queen’s house at Greenwich was begun by Anne of
Denmark, and completed by Henrietta Maria, whose name,
and the date 1635, the period of its completion, are still on

1 As I write, the Board of Works talk of raising its level, to form an entrance to
Buckingham Street. Better let it remain as the old landmark of the river. Though
it will stand if let alone, it will not bear reconstruction.


--page 300

the front of the building. It is the central portion of the
hospital, now the naval school. The present west side of
the great square was built by Webb for Charles II., it is
said from Jones’ design.

In 1G31 he commenced the Church of St. Paul's in Co vent
Garden, which was not finished till 1638. As he designed
it it was of brick with a red tile roof, the columns ot‘the
portico and other parts of stone. Lord Burlington repaired
it with care and reverence in 1727; and in 1795, on its total
destruction by fire, it was rebuilt of stone, by the elder
Hardwick, on the plan and proportions of the original
structure. The piazza of Covent Garden was from his
design — originally with stone columns on a red brick wall.
These have been covered with paint and plaster, and are
now being removed.

Few great architects have been so unlucky. Almost
nothing that he planned was finished, and his works have
been altered or rebuilt. In 1642 the Civil War broke out
and stopped all building. He joined the King’s party — he
was a Roman Catholic, and was taken prisoner at the siege
of Basing. 1 He died at Somerset House in June 1652, in his
seventy-ninth year, and was buried beside his father and
mother, in the church of St. Benet, Paul’s Wharf.

Inigo Jones fell on evil times for art. Its quiet music
was drowned in the noise of battles and the strife of parties.
The nation had more important things to attend to. Had
the King, Charles I., had his way ; had he been allowed
scope for his artistic tastes, by the help of the foreign
painters whose works he admired, and with the genius of
Inigo Jones and the trained workmen of the time to carry
out their ideas in splendid buildings and works of art, Eng-
land might have become a home of the arts. But to give
absolute power to the Crown was too high a price for
Englishmen to pay for this. Whitehall would have been

1 Carlyle’s ‘Cromwell,’ vol. ii. p. 259, 2nd -edition.


--page 301

one of the noblest palaces in Europe. Had it been built
it would have settled for us, in a way we might have been
proud of, the still unsettled question of Government build-
ings in Westminster, and would have given a higher tone
to all the architecture of the country. There was skill in
art, and an appreciation of it in the country at the time,
sufficient to have realised a splendid palace both in details
and decoration. But, seeing what its completion would
have cost us politically, few Englishmen will regret that the
conception was never realised. Is it too much to hope that
the Government offices, which remain to be built, may
have something of the beauty and refinement which Inigo
Jones would have given us, with greater suitableness for
our modern purposes than his great palace would have had ?

The troubles which prevented the building of Whitehall
prevented the carrying out of architectural works through-
out the country. In some few cases Inigo Jones’ designs
were carried out, but for the most part they exist only on
paper.

I have copied from the book of his designs published by
Kent, the plans and elevation of a house for the Duke of
Queensberry. 1 Mr. Fergusson decides, from what he thinks
the inferior merit of the design (figs. 97 and 99, pp. 304, 305),
that it is not Jones’, but probably Webb’s. I do not pretend
to the same insight, but it is historically interesting, because
it illustrates what was, till the Gothic revival, the general
type of English country mansions. The distinctive feature
is the portico in front. For the next hundred years no
gentleman’s mansion was complete without a portico.

It is true that this was an unmeaning decoration, — the
feature is beautiful in itself, and it had been worked out by
successive refinements to- a high degree of perfection, but
its proper use and purpose was gone. It is a “survival,”

1 In Campbell’s ‘Vitruvius BritannicuS’ the same design is entitled Amresbury,
Wiltshire.


--page 302

like what is said to occur in the animal kingdom, of organs
now useless which had served necessary functions in other
circumstances in an earlier stage of the animal’s develop-
ment. In this case the portico is utilised as a covered
balcony from the great hall on the first floor (fig. 100),
an expedient which has been repeated in the buildings
of University College, in London, but with unhappy results
in our climate, so far as comfort and convenience go.
Almost every great mansion built in England in the last
century had such a portico, blocking out the light from
bedroom windows, and making the house look cold and
damp. Yet undoubtedly it gives grandeur to the design.

The back elevation in this design (fig. 99) is interesting,
showing how a certain dignity of architectural effect can
be produced by the simplest means without appearance of
effort, for the position of the windows is determined, as
may be seen by the plan, solely by the exigencies of the in-
ternal arrangement. The windows in the rooms E and K
are kept in the centre, irrespective of any considerations of
symmetry outside.

Short square windows, as in this design, in the upper
story, or attic, as it is architecturally called, continued long a
feature of Classic houses in this country. The horizontal
band which they make gives a Classical effect, which would
be destroyed by breaking them up through the cornice into
the roof ; while to increase the height of the building so as
to make these windows taller, would spoil its proportions.
But to have bedrooms dark and ill-ventilated, from the top
of the windows being halfway down the wall inside is,
perhaps, too high a price to pay for architectural proportion.
The practice of the French Renaissance, of raising dormer
windows above the line of the cornice, is more practical
and better suited for our adoption.

The designs of Inigo Jones thoroughly carry out the
Classic principle of symmetry. It is a principle of all forms




Fig.OT. AMRESBURY. FRONT ELEVATION.



Fig 98.


PLAN OF GROUND FLOOR.




--page 303
--page 304
--page 305
--page 306







--page 307

and types of architecture, as it is of animal organisation.
It is essential to the highest dignity of great buildings, and
it gives some even to small and simple ones. Among Jones’
designs published by Kent there are some simple farm-
steadings to which a really grand architectural effect is
given by arranging the farm-buildings and enclosures with
perfect symmetry on each side of the farmhouse.

It is an error to suppose that symmetry was not aimed at
in Gothic buildings, though the architects felt that it was
not essential in every case ; as when of the two western
towers of a cathedral which had originally been intended,
they carried up only one, as at Strassburg, preferring the
glory of height to symmetry, and feeling that two such
high steeples would be absurd, as I fear that the two great
steeples of Cologne may prove when they are finished. The
old architects, if they had built both steeples, would have
made them different in design. 1

With our Gothic training we no longer consider symmetry
essential, and think it even foolish to make the stables on
one side of a house appear like a repetition of the kitchen
offices on the other. The Gothic practice of allowing the
internal arrangements to control the dispositions of the ex-
terior architecture is a safer guide in house-planning, and
more likely to attain satisfactory results in comfort and
convenience than the Classic principle of making the in-
ternal arrangements fit in as best they may to the design of
the outside.

The inner court of St. John’s College at Oxford (fig. 101)
is said to have been built by Inigo Jones. It was com-
menced in 1631, as we know from an entry in Laud’s diary,
“a.d. 1632, Julii 26. The first stone was laid of my build-
ing at St. John’s.” The next entry referring to the building

1 Before the recent carrrying rip of the north tower at Cologne, it was to be seen
that the mediajval architects had given up all idea of making it similar to the south
one, hut the restorers destroyed the portions which varied in design from the
opposite tower, and made both alike.

--page 308

is on the 3rd of September, 1635, when he goes to St. John’s
from Cudsden, where he was staying, “to see my building
there, and to give some directions for the last finishing of it.”
It is a charming building, happily still one of the few re-
maining in Oxford from which the colour and picturesque-
ness of age have not been removed by modern restoration.
Its Gothic character is sometimes accounted for by supposing
that it is an early work, before his second visit to Italy had
taught him purer Classic. But dates disprove this suppo-
sition. He may have given a sketch for it, but when we
know that before this date he had designed Whitehall
and St. Paul’s portico, it is impossible to believe that this
building was carried out according to his ideas. 1

It is true that, ten years earlier, he had designed the
Gothic chapel of Lincoln’s Inn. But that is not, like the
Gothic parts of St. John’s College, in the traditional style
of the period, but an imitation of an older style mixed
with correct Classic work.

The upper story of St. John’s, with its Perpendicular
windows and cornice and battlements, is clearly the pro-
duction of the workman of the period, following the tradi-
tional style. The general design of the Classic central
porch and arcade, may have been suggested by him, but the
details, though effective, are too far removed from Classic
correctness and elegance to have been designed by the
same hand which drew those of the buildings we know
to be his, or by any one who had studied to good purpose
in Italy.

So long as there was a living style of architecture, this
is what would naturally happen. Every workman, without
any drawings, knew how to cut the ordinary traditional
mouldings, and it would have required much trouble and

1 Laud says nothing of any architect, nor does Anthony Wood in his elaborate
account of the College in his History. In the notes to Wood by Gutch, about a
century ago, the tradition appears ascribing it to Inigo Jones.



Fig. 101. SECOND QUAD OF ST. JOHN’S COLLEGE, OXFORD.



--page 309
--page 310

--page 311

constant personal supervision to make him work in any
other way.

In Wren’s time there is a note of the change in the system
of conducting architecture, by the architect supplying full-
size drawings for the details, instead of following the old
system and allowing the workmen to carry out these accord-
ing to their traditions. In a letter, quoted by Elmes in
his life of Wren, to the authorities of Trinity College,
Cambridge, in explanation of the plans he had submitted
for the new library, Wren says, “I suppose you have good
masons, however, I would willingly take a farther pains
to give all the mouldings in great, we are scrupulous in
small matters ; and, you must pardon us, the architects are
as great pedants as critics or heralds.” It almost seems as
if Wren thought an apology needed for wishing to supply
full-sized drawings, and thus interfering with the established
custom of letting the masons cut the mouldings according
to their own ideas.

Inigo Jones is said to have designed Heriot’s Hospital
in Edinburgh, commenced in 1628, and it is by no means
improbable. Cunningham, in his Life, says the internal
fittings of the council room are in his manner. But judging
from their style they appear to me of later date, of the
time of Charles II. and Grinling Gibbons. Jones may
have furnished drawings for the general disposition and
elevation of the buildings, but the Scotch workmen, who
carried it out, have taken their own way, and built in their
own traditional style.

The general idea of the design of St. John’s College,
Oxford, is found elsewhere in England, as in the interesting
little market cross of Peterborough (fig. 102). And it may
have been a natural development of architecture in the
circumstances of the times. For the arcades, the builders
would see no difficulty in adopting the new ideas. They
had merely to substitute a round arch for a Tudor arch ; but


--page 312

they might not see their way practically to manage the
working of Classic windows without mullions. Just as Gothic
architects at present find it impossible to get their style
thoroughly carried out, because people will not give up the
sliding sash windows, to which they have been accustomed.

During the Civil War and the Commonwealth (1642-60),
there was little tmilding. What was done was done in



Fig. 102. MARKET-CROSS, PETERBOROUGH.


the traditional manner, people not troubling themselves
with art or its professors. With the restoration of Charles
II., and the return to power of an aristocracy, who con-
sidered themselves patrons of the arts, the interest in the
new style revived. During his reign it became the ac-
cepted style of domestic architecture in London. In country
parts, and occasionally at Oxford, long afterwards, the old
style was still clung to. The Great Fire of London, in 1666,
was a notable event in the history of architecture. It put
an end to the building of wooden houses in the town, made
brick the common building material of England, and spread


--page 313

the fashion of Classic houses. It gave to Sir Christopher
Wren one of the finest opportunities any architect has ever
had, and he proved himself not unworthy of it.

He was then thirty-four years old, having been born in
1632, at Knoyle in Wiltshire, where his father, who was
in the same year made Dean of Windsor, was rector.
The family were ardent Royalists. His uncle, Matthew
Wren, Bishop of Ely, was charged before Parliament with
High-church practices ; turning to the east, and holding the
consecrated bread over his head for the adoration of the
people ; with discouraging preaching in his diocese ; and
with encouraging sports on Sunday afternoons. He was not
brought to trial, but remained twenty years in prison, till
Cromwell’s death, refusing the conditions on which he might
have had his liberty. 1

Wren, being delicate in health, was educated at home,
excepting a short time at Westminster School. While a
boy he was remarkable for his knowledge and invention in
every branch of science. In his thirteenth year he invented
a new mathematical instrument, which he dedicated to his
father in a Latin address. In 1647, when he was fifteen,
he was appointed demonstrating assistant by the Lecturer
on Anatomy, at Surgeon’s Hall. Anatomical drawings
of his are extant, and he afterwards made discoveries in
Anatomy. He made inventions in the use of the microscope,
studied chemistry, and was an excellent mathematician.
In his twenty-fifth year he was appointed Professor ot
Astronomy at Gresham College, and afterwards Savilian

1 Parentalia : or, Memoirs of the Family of the Wrens; viz., of Mathew Bishop
of Ely, Christopher Dean of Windsor, &amp;c., but chiefly of Sir Christopher Wren, late
Surveyor-General of the Royal Buildings, President of the Royal Society, &amp;c. &amp;c.
In which is contained, besides his Works, A groat number of Original Papers and
Records; on Religion, Poloticks, Anatomy, Mathematicks, Architecture, Antiquities;
and most branches of Polite Literature. Compiled by his Son Christopher; now
published by his Grandson, Stephen Wren, Esq.; with the care of Joseph Ames,
F.R.S., and Secretary to the Society of Antiquaries, London. London. Printed for
T. Osborn, in Gray’s-Inn ; and R. Dodsley, in Pall-Mall. MDCCL.


--page 314

Professor of Astronomy at Oxford. He was an active
member and an early president of the Royal Society,
founded immediately after the Restoration, and he was
constantly bringing before it new inventions of bis own
in all branches of human knowledge.

Evelyn at Oxford, in 1654, says in his Diary: “After
dinner I visited that miracle of a youth, Mr. Christopher
Wren, nephew to the Bishop of Ely.” In his Sculptura,
he calls him “that rare and early prodigy of universal
genius, Mr. Christopher Wren, our worthy and accomplished
friend.”

Wren’s first employment as an architect seems to have
been in 1661, when the King, on his Restoration, sent for
him from Oxford to assist Sir John Denham, Surveyor-
G-eneral of His Majesty’s Works, in the repairs of St. Paul’s
and Windsor Castle, and in building a new palace at
Greenwich. Denham had been promised the reversion of
the post by Charles I., for his loyalty rather than his
capacity, of which Evelyn, who speaks somewhat con-
temptuously of his proposals for Greenwich Hospital (Diary,
Oct. 19th, 1661), “though he had Mr. Webb, Inigo Jones’
man to assist him,” had a low opinion.

There seems to be no record of how or where Wren got
his practical knowledge of architecture. It was part of the
polite learning of the day, and there is some evidence that
his father, in 1634, designed a building for the Queen of
Charles I., which apparently was not erected. It is not
unreasonable to suppose that his father’s interest in the art
would give the son opportunities of which his enormous
powers of acquisition and invention would make the most.

In 1663 he was appointed assistant Surveyor-General, to
do Denham’s work ; and, having refused an offer to go to
Tangier to fortify it and construct the mole there, of which
Pepys speaks so frequently in his Diary, he was appointed
to superintend the repairs of St. Paul’s. The church was


--page 315

in a bad state, notwithstanding that Inigo Jones had cased
a good part of it with Portland stone, and had rebuilt the
north and south fronts, as well as the portico at the west
end. The roof, as appears from an account of Wren’s, was
ruinous, the pillars bent from their “ill-building with small
rubbish stones and much mortar, and cased only with
small stones.” But his proposals for its repair would not
commend themselves to us. He wished, “by cutting off the
corners of the cross, to reduce the middle part into a spacious
dome or rotunda, with a cupola or hemispherical roof, and
upon the cupola (for the outward ornament) a lantern with
a spring top to rise proportionally, though not to that un-
necessary height of the former spire of timber and lead,
burnt by lightning.” “I would not,” he continues, “persuade
the tower to be pulled down at first, but the new work to
be built round it, partly because the expectations of people
are to be kept up ; for many unbelievers would bewail
the loss of old Paul’s steeple, and despond if they did not
see a hopeful successor rise in its stead.” Not much,
apparently, would have been left us of old St. Paul’s, even
without the Great Fire.

In May, 1663, he exhibited a model for the Sheldonian
Theatre at Oxford, not finished till 1669, the great roof of
which of 90 feet span is still a marvel of construction ; and
in April the first stone was laid of the Chapel of Pembroke
Hall, at Cambridge. Though this was Wren’s first building ;
I believe it was actually in contemplation by the college
authorities to pull it down, as they have done the old hall,
and other most interesting parts of the College, replacing
them by modern work by Mr. Waterhouse.

In the summer of 1665 he visited Paris, where he occupied
himself, as he says in a letter to a friend, 1 “in surveying the
most esteemed fabrics of the city and the country round.”
Versailles did not please him. “The women, as they make

1 Parentalia, p. 261.


--page 316

here the language and fashions, and meddle with politics
and philosophy, so they sway also in architecture ; works of
Filgrand and little knacks are in great vogue, but building
certainly ought to have the attribute of eternal, and
therefore the only thing incapable of new T fashions.” He
seems unconscious that he was himself inventing new
fashions in architecture. “After the incomparable villas
of Yaux and Maisons, I shall but name Ruel, Couzance,
Chilly, Essoans, St. Maur, St. Mande, Issy, Meudon, Rincy,
Chantilly, Yerneul, Lioncour ; all of which, and I might
add many others, I have surveyed ; and that I might not
lose the impressions of them, I shall bring you almost all
France on paper, which I found, by some or other, ready
designed to my hand. Bernini’s design for the Louvre I
would have given my skin for, but the old reserved Italian
gave me but a few minutes’ view. I shall be able, by dis-
course and a crayon, to give you a tolerable account of it.” 1

He had returned to London in March 1666. He does not
seem to have thought of going to Italy. “The works going-
on in Paris,” he says, “make a school of architecture the
best probably at this day in Europe” (Parentalia, p. 261).
On August 27, he made a survey of St. Paul’s, with Evelyn
and others of the commissioners, who reported in favour
of replacing it by Wren’s cupola, though some wished to
reinstate the spire. On September 6th the Great Fire of
London, which had been burning since September 2nd,
settled the dispute by destroying St. Paul’s.

The remainder of Wren’s life, for the next fifty-seven
years, was spent in rebuilding what the fire had burnt.

Acting as surveyor-general, the duties of which office seem
to have included many of those at present exercised by the
Metropolitan Board of Works, he submitted to the King on
the 18th of the same month a plan for rebuilding the city. 2

He proposed a “key” or embankment along the river,

1 Parentalia. 2 Given in Parentalia.


--page 317

from the Temple to the Tower, lined with the Halls of the
City Companies — the great lines of traffic widened and
improved, with “piazzas” at their junctions. But the
rights of individuals were too strong in England to make
the scheme practicable.

Attempts were still made to patch up old St. Paul’s. In
1668 parts of it threatened to fall, and Wren was sent for
in great haste from Oxford to advise ; but it was not till
1675 that the plan of the new church was decided on, Wren
appointed architect, and the work commenced. The first
service in the new church was held in 1698, twenty-four
years afterwards and in 1710, when Wren was in his
seventy-eighth year, tire top stone of the lantern was laid
in his presence by his son.

During this time, besides other works, he rebuilt fifty-two
parish churches in London ; many of the halls of the Mer-
chant Companies ; the hospitals at Greenwich and Chelsea ;
King William’s Palace at Hampton Court; Marlborough
House and a few private houses ; among them the Earl of
Orford’s house at St. James’s ; the Duchess of Buckingham’s,
in St. James’ Park, and the large mansion on the south
side of Queen Square, Bloomsbury, for Lord Newcastle,
the plans for which are among his drawings at All Souls’
College, Oxford.

In 1718, the Court influence round George I. deprived
him of his post. In February 1723, he died at the age of
ninety-one.

Although Wren thought that “Building ought to have
the attribute of eternal, and therefore the only thing
incapable of new fashions,” few architects have shown
greater originality. The variety in the design of his steeples
is marvellous. That of St. Magnus, London Bridge, built,
according to Elmes, in Queen Anne’s time in 1705, is a fair
specimen of his style (fig. 103). With his age he accepted the
authority of the Classic orders, but his irrepressible invention


--page 318

made a new architecture out of them. His skill in con-
struction made him equal to the most difficult problems ; his

fecundity of invention in art
was governed by a sense of
proportion and beauty. We
laugh at his Gothic. We can
copy better old Gothic mould-
ings, but his Gothic towers
are admirable in outline,
which unhappily our modern
ones seldom are. His Classic
mouldings are always ex-
cellent ; full and flowing in
their contours, without the
delicacy of the Greek. Many
of the forms which he used,
as for example, his windows,
are those of the French archi-
tecture of his day — France,
we saw, he thought the best
school in Europe — but in-
stead of their sometimes
feeble elegance, he imparted
to them an English masculine
vigour.

In his works, there is a
commonsense practicalness
which render them always
satisfactory. Merchant
Taylors’ School, lately de-
stroyed, which he built im-
mediately after the Great
Fire, is an eminently sensible
building. For the use of the
illustrations of it I am indebted to the proprietors ol ‘The



Fig. 103. STEEPLE OF ST. MAGNUS, LONDON
BRIDGE.


--page 319

Graphic’ (figs. 104, 105, 10G). It was built cheaply ; with no
expenditure on ornament except the Doric pilasters on the
street front (fig. 104) and a few mouldings and cornices, but
these were admirable in their contour. The interior (fig. 106),



Fig. 104. OLD MERCHANT TAYLORS’ SCHOOL, FRONT TO STREET.

though quite simple, is very dignified. The great door in
the end, which was of excellent design and well carved, and
the high panelling, give a feeling of art and comfort
different from the dreary interiors of most modern schools.


--page 320

The mode of dividing the window-panes seems to me to be
an alteration of a later date . 1

Wren so trained a school of workmen that Classic be-
came their traditional
style, which they
could carry out with-
out drawings. This
is the only practical
method of producing
art - workmen . The
South Kensington
system of trying to
make each workman
an artist, capable of
invention, has hither-
to produced only fail-
ure, and can never
have any other re-
sult. The original in-
ventors in any age
must always be few.
To produce good
architecture gene-
rally, their inven-
tions should be learnt
and thoroughly un-
derstood by ordinary
builders and work-
men, so that they
become part of their
traditions and habits. The old system of apprenticeship
accomplished this. Failing this, we are dependent on the
modern system of architects directing the building to its
minutest details by means of drawings, which presupposes

1 I have since learned that they were altered in 1852.



Fig. 105 .

PLAYING COURT, MERCHANT TAYLORS* SCHOOL.



VOL. I.


J-'ig. 106 SCHOOL-ROOM OF MERCHANT TAYLORS' SCHOOL

--page 321

--page 322


--page 323

that all architects are original inventors. If they are, this
age is richer in originality than any previous one. The
condition of modern architecture does not bear out this
supposition.

Wren introduced Italians for sculpture and decoration, and
developed a school of wood-carving under Grinling Gibbons.

The stone carving at St. Paul’s is the work of a school of
carvers, admirable in its style, full and rich, without the
perfection of line of the Italian, or the graceful delicacy
of the French. In time the carving lost this fulness, in
striving after elegance, and became, as in the Church of St.
Mary-le-Strand, somewhat thin and weedy.

The rich and splendid wood-carving was a special glory
of the architecture of Wren’s time. Grinling Gibbons was
counted the best wood-carver of his day, though, as a part
of architecture, his work seems to me too natural. Evelyn,
then living at Deptford, discovered him, and Gibbons’ work
is so associated with the architecture of the time, that the
story will not be thought out of place :

“This day,” Evelyn says in his Diary for January 18th,
1671, “I first acquainted his Majesty with that incomparable
young man Gibbons, whom I lately met with in an obscure
place by mere accident as I was walking near a poor solitary
thatched house, in a field in our parish, near Sayes Court. 1 I
found him shut in ; but, looking in at the window, I perceived
him carving that large cartoon or crucifix of Tintoretto, a
copy of which I had myself brought from Venice, where the
original painting remains. I asked if I might enter : he
opened the door civilly to me, and I saw him about such a
work as, for the curiosity of handling, drawing, and curious
exactness, I never had before seen in all my travels. I
questioned him why he worked in such an obscure and
lonesome place ; he told me it was that he might apply
himself to his profession without interruption, and wondered

1 Evelyn’s house at Deptford, which came to him through his wife.


--page 324

not a little how I found him out. I asked if he was un-
willing to be made known to some great man, for that I
believed it might turn to his profit ; he answered he was
yet hut a beginner, but would not be sorry to sell off that
piece; on demanding the price, he said £100. In good
earnest the very frame was worth the money, there being
nothing in nature so tender and delicate as the flowers and
festoons about it, and yet the work was very strong ; in the
piece were more than one hundred figures of men, &amp;c. I
found he was likewise musical, and very civil, sober, and dis-
creet in his discourse. There was only an old woman in the
house. So desiring leave to visit sometimes I went away.

“\§th. February . — This day dined with me Mr. Surveyor,
Dr. Christopher Wren, and Mr. Pepys’ clerk of the Acts,
two extraordinary, ingenious and knowing persons, and
other friends. I carried them to see the piece of carving
which I had recommended to the King.

“ls£. March . — I caused Mr. Gibbons to bring to Whitehall
his excellent piece of carving, where being come, I advertised
his Majesty. * * * No sooner was he entered and cast

his eyes on the work, but he was astonished at the curiosity
of it, and having considered it a long time and discoursed
with Mr. Gibbons, whom I brought to kiss his hand, he com-
manded it should be immediately carried to the Queen’s side
to show her. It was carried up to her bed-chamber, where
she and the King looked on and admired it again ; the King-
being called away, he left us with the Queen believing she
would have bought it, it being a crucifix ; but when his
Majesty was gone, a French peddling woman, one Madame
de Boord, who used to bring petticoats, and fans, and baubles
out of France to the ladies, began to find fault with several
things in the work ; which she understood no more than an
ass or a monkey, so as in a kind of indignation I caused the
person who brought it to carry it back to the chamber,
finding the Queen so much governed by the ignorant French


--page 325

woman, and this incomparable artist had his labour only
for his pains, which not a little displeased me ; and he was
fain to send it down to his cottage again ; he not long after
sold it for £80, though worth £100 without the frame, to
Sir George Yiner.

“His Majesty’s surveyor, Mr. Wren faithfully promised
me to employ him. I having also bespoke his Majesty for
his work at Windsor, which my friend Mr. May, the archi-
tect there, was going to alter and repair universally ; for
on the next day I had a fair opportunity of talking to his
Majesty about it in the lobby, next the Queen’s side, where
I presented him with some sheets of my history.” The
remainder of the entry, though it does not refer to art, is
interesting: “I thence walked with him, when I both
saw and heard a very familiar discourse between [him] and
Mrs. Nelly, as they called an impudent comedian ; she
looking out of her garden on a terrace at the top of a wall”
(where now is the Army and Navy Club), “and [he]
standing on the green walk under it. I was heartily sorry
at this scene. Thence the King walked to the Duchess of
Cleveland, another lady of pleasure and curse of our nation.”

The following letter, quoted by Evelyn’s editor, shows how
things are managed in much the same way in every age : —

Hon red

Sr I wold beg the faver wen you see Sr Josff Williams
[Williamson] again you wold be pleased to speack to him
that hee wold get me to Carve his Ladis sons hous my Lord
Kildare for I onderstand it will [be] verry considerabell or
If you haen Acquantains wich my Lord to speack to him
hissealf and I shall for Evre be obliged to you I would
speack to S ir Josef mysealf but I knouw it would do better
from you S r youre Most umbell

“Sarvant

“G. Gibbons.


“Lond 23 Mar 1682.”


--page 326

Gibbons bad not bad much advantage of education.
Walpole says it is uncertain whether he was born in
Holland or England. The errors in the letter are very
English.

This digression may be pardoned for its own interest, and
as bringing us into personal acquaintance with the times
and the men whose works we are considering.

In Wren’s day Classic architecture became the vernacular
of the country ; the mode which every workman understood,
and in which he naturally worked. This result was caused
partly by the abandonment of the old practice of building
in wood and plaster, with which the Gothic modes of work
were associated in England, from the exhaustion of the
forests as well as the dread of fire ; and partly from the new
fashion, which had long been accepted by the rich and
cultivated, descending in time to the people.

Gothic buildings were still erected. Wren built many
himself, the Tom tower at Christ Church, Oxford, and
Gothic towers to churches ; as did Hawksmoor after him.
But these were conscious revivals to harmonise with existing
Gothic work, or to perpetuate a form which association had
rendered dear. “Many unbelievers,” as he said, “would
bewail the loss of old Paul’s steeple.” But with these ex-
ceptions, which are of the kind that prove the rule, the
architects and masons of the day all worked in the same
style.

Old Bedlam, or Bethlehem Hospital, of the central block
of which I give a drawing (fig. 107), is a fair specimen of
the ordinary work of the day. I cannot find that it had
any architect. It was begun in 1675, and finished in fifteen
months, “which,” says Maitland, in his history of London,
“was considered wonderfully quick work,” as well it might.
Building is one of the arts in which mankind has not ad-
vanced. Its excellence depends on traditional skill, which



fig. 107 .


BETHLEHEM HOSPITAL (CENTRAL BLOCK).


--page 327
--page 328

--page 329

enables the whole body of workmen to work together in
concert ; each, by the teaching of his apprenticeship, know-
ing his own trade, so that everything in the building, with-
out special direction and without drawings, harmonises
perfectly in style. Our modern progress is destructive of
tradition. This building, now destroyed, was 540 feet long
and 40 feet wide, broken by the pavilion, which, with its
marked perpendicular lines, rose in the centre like a tower.
The gate,

“Where Cibber’s brazen brainless brothers stand,”

was erected after the Union, as the supporters, representing
the lion and unicorn, show. It is a pity this gate could not
have been re-erected somewhere ; for it is an admirable
design, and the statues of
raving and melancholy mad-
ness, though not the kind of
decoration for an asylum
which our kindlier treatment
of lunacy finds appropriate,
are powerful and interesting.

They are preserved in the
South Kensington Museum,
but, having been designed for
their position in the archi-
tecture, they lose their value
when removed from it.

St. Catharine’s Hall, or Col-
lege, as the authorities call it,
at Cambridge, commenced in
1680, shows the same treat-
ment of breaking the hori-
zontal line of the building
by a taller Classic frontispiece. It is of brick with stone
dressings. Though later in date, it stills retains in its
mullioned windows some Gothic character ; for here, as at,



Fig. 108.

ST. CATHARINE’S COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.


--page 330

Oxford, old traditions continued. Till a few years ago
St. Catharine’s College was complete in style throughout,
but its harmony was destroyed and its history falsified, by
altering the chapel into quite incongruous Gothic. Its
architecture may have been influenced by that of Clare



Fig. 109. DRAPERS' ALMHOUSES, MARGATE.


College beside it, which was being built at the time, the design
of which, though not fully carried out till 1715, dates from
1638, and shows mullions and other Gothic features, mingled
with Classic, so as to produce a complete and characteristic
English style.


--page 331

Drapers’ Hospital, near Margate, belonging to the
Quakers (fig. 109), is a characteristic specimen of a type
of English architecture which has lately acquired notoriety
under the name of “Queen Anne.” Whatever may be
thought of its merits, it has claim, I think, to be called a
true and national style. It is a builder’s, not a*n archi-
tect’s, style, the product of traditions naturally developing
themselves. At the end of the seventeenth century brick
had become the common building material of the country,
and Classic forms and mouldings the vernacular of the
workmen, who, following apparently their own instincts,
formed the style out of these elements, without drawings
from architects, who were too learned to tolerate its bar-
barism. In this instance, though the walls are of the usual
flint building of the district, all the architectural parts are
in brick, the grey and red making a beautiful contrast of
colour. The style is common in the villages and cottages
of the neighbourhood.

The shaping of the gables into various curves, which is
one of the characteristics of the style, is a simple and
natural and consequently cheap mode of producing an effect
in brick. It is one of the many ways in which the builders
in every country, still inspired by the old Gothic freedom,
got rid of the trammels of Classic rule.

The later Italian architects, while not daring to alter the
parts and proportions of the five orders, had, especially in
the Jesuit churches, striven after richness and magnificence,
by broken pediments and great curved scrolls. In France,
in the style of Louis Quatorze, while the architecture under
the dominion of orders continued correct and dull, the internal
decoration revelled in a profusion of curved lines carried
out into the forms of the panels and even of the window
bars, where it was unconstfuctural and unmeaning.

The same tendency to free curves shows itself in the
Queen Anne style, which, though Classic in all its details,


--page 332

has in it something of Gothic character. It avoids the
deeply set windows and dark shadows of Classic, and gets
the sense of continuous wall surface characteristic of Gothic
by keeping the window frames flush with the walls, and
making them part of the wall surface by covering them with
thick sash bars. In this instance the windows are even more
Gothic with their mullions and transoms and leaded lights.

This Gothic character seems to have impressed some
architect, who has lately had this building through his
hands, for, since this drawing was made, he has attempted
to improve it by alterations in the Gothic taste. The
Gothic canopied tops to the gate-piers show the commence-
ment of his work. He has spoilt its character by traceried
windows and the earthly vanity of shields for coats of arms,
thinking these, I suppose, suitable historical adjuncts of an
old Quaker establishment.

Kew Palace (fig. 110) is a more elaborate and archi-
tectural example of the Queen Anne style. It is probably
not the work of an architect, else it would have been more
correct, but one of those productions of a builder which
were denounced by persons of taste and knowledge as
aberrations from the standard of Classic purity. The orders
are incorrect, and even clumsy. There is no Classic pre-
cedent for the curved gables of the roof ; but it is a
charming house, homely and yet dignified, built to live in,
but yet pleasant to look on.

The two houses at Olney (fig. Ill), in one of which the
poet Cowper lived, have an air of neglect and squalor
which make them less pleasant examples of the style. They
date probably from early in the last century, the aprons
under the windows being a common characteristic in Queen
Anne’s time. Though this and the key-stones give them
some pretentions to architecture, they are probably the work
of the builder of the period.



Fig. 110.


KEW PALACE.


--page 333
--page 334



--page 335

The old rectory at Redington (fig. 112) is a good example
of a simpler and later form of Queen Anne architecture.



Such houses are common over all England. With their
cheerful red brick fronts among the green, the windows


--page 336

with their broad white frames and small window panes
twinkling in the light, they suggest all the pleasant asso-
ciations of an English home. Inside, unless where modern
taste has altered them, there are pleasant parlours lined
with panelling painted white ; roomy, comfortable bed-
rooms; ample cupboards and keeping places, and an excel-
lent wine cellar. They do not come within the category
of architectural buildings, according to our recent notions ;
Classic orders and Gothic ornament are alike unknown to
them. They are the natural outcome of simple brick
building, in an age when the work of every workman, and



Fig. 112. RECTORY OF RED1NGT0N.


every moulding, however simple, was governed by traditions
which secured it from offending against good taste.

A notable feature of the Queen Anne style is its use ot
cut brick for the mouldings and carving, which in Classic
architecture are usually executed in stone. We have seen,
that this was an old Roman practice (fig. 63, p. 208). A
peculiar kind of brick is used for this kind of work, called
“rubbers,” granular and soft, but capable, as we see from
some examples of carved capitals among the old buildings
of the Temple, of standing several centuries of exposure
without injury.


--page 337

It may seem absurd and unreasonable to make up large
blocks for mouldings and capitals out of such small materials
as bricks, and it might appear better, if we cannot get
stone, to mould them in large pieces of terra-cotta, as has
been done with considerable success in the Albert Hall and
other buildings at South Kensington. But cut brick pro-
duces a different and, I think, more charming effect. Large
pieces of terra-cotta, and even moulded bricks, are apt to
twist in burning, it is difficult to get their lines true, and
the colour is often unsatisfactory. Yellow terra-cotta is
often beautiful, but the red and the moulded bricks are
usually of a livid purply hue. In cut brick work the lines
are true and clean and the colour a charming orange red.

During the eighteenth century the Classic style became
the style of the country — it was used in all kinds of
buildings, domestic, civil, and ecclesiastical — it devel-
oped into a national variety, and assumed a distinctively
English type.

By those who studied architecture and knew what Classic
purity and elegance were, this process was considered mere
degradation. The mouldings were not always given their
proper parts and contours. The authorised proportions of
the orders were not observed. English workmen gave the
style a character in accordance with their own nature and
common sense.

The Town Hall in the centre of the large market place
of South Shields on the Tyne (fig. 113), a place which
never advanced any pretensions to being aesthetic, is a
fair specimen of this common English style. It has no pre-
tensions to elegance ; it is plain and even somewhat clumsy,
but it is not without picturesqueness, and is an eminently
common sense building The architecture is purely and
naturally constructive ; it has forgotten the orders and
their proportions, it thinks for itself. Mr. Fergusson might


--page 338

think it ugly or beneath notice, but he could not criticise
it as slavishly carrying out the rules of Classic, or using
the unconstructional ornament of pilasters. It is interesting
to compare it with another building, the Custom House at
King’s Lynn (fig. 114), of similar form and design, but
of much greater beauty and elegance, of higher architec-



Fig 113. TOWN HALL, SOUTH SHIELDS.


tural pretensions, and more in accordance with Classic
rule.

In the lower story we have the Classic arrangement of
filling in the space formed by the Greek column and archi-
trave with the Roman arch, which is certainly less logical
than the simple arcade in the Shields building. In the
upper story Gothic influence appears in the similar space


--page 339

being filled in with a mullioned window. Over the entrance
is a statue of Charles II., in whose reign the building was
erected.

The general treatment recalls the Arundel Museum at
Oxford, and the buildings of the later style of Francis I. in
France.


The gradual pro-
gression towards
greater simplicity
in the English Re-
naissance, which
can be traced es-
pecially in more
ordinary buildings,
was occasionally in-
terrupted by the
greater learning
and better know-
ledge of some archi-
tect or even by the
introduction of a
foreign style.

The screen of
Montague House,
the old British Mu-
seum (fig. 115), is
obviously F rench in
its architecture. It
occupied the site of
the present high railing which dwarfs the height of its
Grecian successor, and shuts it up in a cage. This French
character, shown specially in the tall slated roofs, is due
to its architect having been a Frenchman, Peter Paget,
of Marseilles. The fashion of these tall French roofs never




Fin. 114. CUSTOM HOUSE, KING’S LYNN.



--page 340

took root in England till lately, in consequence, I believe,
of the Gothic revival.


This English Renaissance style, to which accident has
given the name of Queen Anne, but which commenced
before her reign, and continued long after it, became the
characteristic style of London.

The Great Fire destroyed old London with its “post and

pan” houses of
wood and plaster,
whitewashed every
three years ; which
had in old times
given it the name
of the White Town.
That terrible lesson
made peremptory
the orders which
had been frequently
passed, but little
observed, since the
time of James I.,
that all houses
should be of brick.
London in its enor-

Fig. 115. MONTAGUE HOUSE — THE^OLD BRITISH MUSEUM.

mo us growth, which

bes:an after the Restoration and has continued ever since,
spread itself over the country, arid absorbed outlying
villages and towns. All the houses were built in the new
style, which applied the rules of Classic, as far as they would
conveniently go, to building in brick. This style continued
in a process of natural change and growth till the time of
George IV.

At first it retained something of Gothic picturesqueness,
as appears in the old street (fig. 116 ), now destroyed, which


--page 341

Jed from the Strand to the river, near Waterloo Bridge.
The narrow windows, at the corner of tlie house to the
right, show a common feature of the style, due to the old
Gothic ideas still influencing the builders, quite at variance
with the Classic rule that all windows in a row should be
equidistant and of equal size irrespective of the size of the
apartment which they lit.

Gradually the style became more correct. The windows
were made uniform, not only in the same house, but in the



Fig. 116. Ol.D STltEET IN LONDON.


whole row. As the houses were built by the yard for sale,
there was no reason for making one different from another.
They lost their individuality, and the process was encouraged
by the foolish building conditions of ground landlords, in-
sisting that streets should be built uniform, according to an
elevation which they furnished ; so that in time the style
was degraded to the dreary uniformity of Gower Street.

Yet it is a true style, correct and in harmony, to the
smallest particular. Every moulding is right in its own


--page 342

Fig. 117. Fig. 118.

DOORWAYS IM ESSEX STREET, STRAND.

way, and tells its place and date in the gradual progress.
It avoided bad taste. The highest compliment that could
be paid to art or ornament in that age, was that it should
be “chaste,” till architecture in fear of offending became
absolutely dull and colourless.

In its dullest examples there is character and even dignity,
as in the tall wrought-iron railings, the delicate balconies,
and especially the entrance doors, on which was con-
centrated what little architectural ornament was expended
on each house.

These doorways were different in every house, giving
each house individuality, notwithstanding the general
sameness of the street — and they were beautiful, sometimes
even noble examples of design. In this respect these
houses were better than those of our builders, which are
ornamented all over — with stucco only, it is true — but


--page 343

Fig. 119. DOORWAY IN ESSEX STREET, STRAND.

all in the row absolutely alike, so that a man knows his
own house only by the number on the door.

Of these doors I give three specimens, all from one little
street, Cecil Street, Strand. They date from early in the
eighteenth century, and very fairly illustrate the general
character (figs. 117, 118, 119).

Except in some few more magnificent examples, these
doorways in the old houses are always made of wood.
This is forbidden now, by the London Building Act ; some-
what needlessly, I think ; the danger of their spreading
fire not being obvious. The joiner work in the style, as
in the internal fittings, is generally architectural, and more
Classic than the brick and stone building. A universal
feature in all these doors is the wdndow above, lighting
the passage, filled with delicate wooden tracery ; always
of playful and pretty design, and in many cases showing


--page 344

marvellous examples of delicate wood-work. These windows
are part of the architecture of the door, and essential to its
beauty. By a rule of the Portman estate, before a new
lease was granted by the ground landlord, the tenant was
compelled to improve the property, by clearing out this
tracery and substituting a single sheet of plate glass — a
curious instance of stupid destructiveness.

But the street architecture of the style was governed, to
an extent Lord Bacon never meant, by his maxim that
“houses are built to live in, not to look on.” With the
exception of the doorways (and when the style was dying
out in the beginning of the century, no trouble was taken
even with them), the fronts were absolutely plain. In
the interiors neither trouble nor expense is spared in the
design and ornament.

The ceilings are covered with delicately moulded plaster
ornaments of leaves and sprays, and figures, specially
designed for each room. The chimney-pieces are of marble
inlaid in different colours, and excellently carved. The
doors are of solid mahogany, the panel mouldings carved
with egg and tongue, the architraves and cappings
painted white like the other wood-work of the room, which
brings out the contour of the mouldings. Every room
is designed and treated architecturally, with a panelled
surbase or dado round it, which was seen through the open
carved backs of the chairs, and with an enriched and well-
proportioned frieze and cornice. People cared more for
these things then than they do now. They gave them
thought and care, and spent their money on them. It was
easier then than now to get them well-designed and all
in keeping; for the style was a living one, understood by
every workman, who worked as he had been trained, in
harmony with his fellows. Some designers may have been
better than others ; acknowledged as masters of the style
and setting new fashions, like the Brothers Adam. But the


--page 345

work which is not theirs is similar in style, and they could
not have carried out the work they are credited with, all
over the three kingdoms, so completely, unless the style had
been everywhere familiar to the workmen. There are still
in London many such interiors as I have described, some
turned to base uses, in districts now unfashionable, while
others, alas ! have been improved by the modern builder,
the surbase torn down, the delicate white marble chimney-
piece replaced by one of enamelled slate, with a gigantic
shelf and clumsy consoles; and a new cornice substituted,
with coarse mouldings and vulgar ornament, for the old one
which had been proportioned to the room.

The Adam style of interior decoration has of late become
fashionable again. It is chaste and elegant, but rather
feeble. The same attenuated ornament is used in every
position and in every material ; for plaster cornices and
ceilings, the mantle-pieces and fire-grates and the wood-work
of doors and surbases. In the modern revival of the style
the examples frequently miss one chief merit of the older
work, the consistency with which it was carried out into
every detail of ornament and furniture.

During the Regency (1811-1819), there was a revival of
street architecture ; a part of that general awakening from
eighteenth century dulness, which the French Revolution
everywhere caused. By this time Greek architecture, which
Stuart and Revett had discovered, had come to be under-
stood, and was perceived to be different in principle and
form from the Roman, with which, since the Renaissance, it
had been supposed to be identical. It was seen to be more
refined and beautiful ; that it rejected the use of the arch,
and of brick as a building material, and used great stone
lintels as the only means of spanning openings. People had
become tired of the meanness to which brick architecture
had degenerated, and the wilderness of grey stocks which
London had become. But stone, especially of the dimensions


--page 346

which Greek architecture required, was impossible in London
houses ; but the appearance of it could be got by stucco, for
which there is Roman and even Greek authority. The
brightness of the new white buildings charmed every one ;
and if, in looking at examples of them (such as the terraces
round the Regent’s Park or on the cliffs of Brighton, which
were among the first fruits of the movement), we can
divest ourselves for the moment of our present ideas and
forget that they are shams, we must admit that they exhibit
something of the brightness, and even of the grandeur of
Classic architecture. The builders, as usual, followed the
fashion, and carried out the new style, in their rows of
houses, in worse architecture and meaner design. Ground
landlords, in letting their land for building, insisted on its
adoption in the new streets, and for the next thirty or forty
years it was the common London style.

One element of grandeur was sought for by designing a
row of houses as if it were one single great building, with
a great pediment in the centre and symmetrical wings on
each side flanked by propyloea. This grand design was
apportioned equally among the several houses, the division
giving perhaps to one house two windows out of the wings,
and another under a corner of the pediment. To prevent
this absurdity being apparent, which would have spoiled
the effect of the architecture, a clause was inserted in each
lease that the owners should all use the same colour in
painting their houses. But the workman was not always
successful in matching the colour, or the houses being jjainted
in different years the various degrees of dirtiness made the
deception obvious.

This palatial style was carried out with better effect in
the squares and crescents of Edinburgh, which were built
about the same time. Greek architecture was studied there
with enthusiasm, and reproduced with knowledge and in-
vention in adapting it to modern use. The splendid quarries


--page 347

of Craigleith furnished blocks of stone large enough for
the columns and lintels of an order occupying the height of
two stories. The result, as in Moray Place, has nothing
of the meanness which their material gives to the London
examples, but there is an air of gloomy aristocratic grandeur
which the present age has found depressing. Even here
a difference in the colour of the window-blinds exposed
the deception of the design. Internally the requirements
of the architecture were inconvenient, restricting the ap-
parent number of stories, and making the windows of the
upper floors look out on a gutter and blank parapet wall in
order to conceal them.

In London, the brightness of the clean white-painted
fronts of the new architecture was an improvement on the
dinginess of the mean fronts of grey stock bricks. But the
obligation on the owners to paint the outside of their houses
once in every three years (for which there was precedent
in a similar rule in old white- washed London) was found
onerous. The stucco or cement occasionally fell off in great
flakes, and was expensive to repair.

Of late the builders have got over this difficulty, still
keeping the houses white, which was supposed to be the
only proper colour for architecture, by facing the walls with
white bricks and limiting the stucco to the architrave
mouldings round the windows, the cornices, the corners, and
the Classic columns of the porticos. The ingenuity of man
has never produced a form of architecture more dismal and
contrary to common sense; for the bricks, white at first,
soon become a dirty grey, like dirty linen ; and the meaning
of architraves and cornices in architecture is, that bemg the
exposed parts, they should be of harder and better materials
than the walls of the building. But stucco is meaner than
brick, and more easily chipped. The right arrangement of
the materials would be to cover the walls with stucco, where
it is useful to keep out the damp, aud to make the corners


--page 348

and cornices of brick or stone. Some noble buildings, like
the Palace of the Uffizzi, at Florence, have been designed
on this principle.

The Gothic revival of the last twenty years, though a
whole generation of architects have been trained in it and
practised it, has had no appreciable influence on street
architecture. The builders would not risk building Gothic
houses for sale, and, I think they were right. Artistic
publicans have occasionally adopted it for public-houses ;
but the result has not been gratifying to the lovers of the
style.

Within the last year or two there has been a revival of
the “Queen Anne” style for town houses, and even for
streets. The fashion seems to be spreading. It has received
some accession of force from the schools of the London
School Board, planted in every district of London, having
been mostly built in that style. For the architecture of a
few of the earliest of these I am responsible, having found
by the practical experience of a house I built for myself
in this manner, that the style adapts itself to every modern
necessity and convenience. In that case I made no attempt
to follow any particular style, the style grew naturally from
using the ordinary materials and modes of work, and
trying to give them character and interest. It is as pliable
as Gothic, having inherited its freedom. Large windows
or small, wide or narrow, with mullions or without them,
arched or square-headed, with sliding sashes or hinged
casements, with sash-bars or leaded glazing may be used in
it as convenience or fancy dictates.

Though some of its forms are adapted for stone, it is
properly a brick style, and therefore specially suited for
London houses. Ground landlords have favoured it and
encouraged its adoption, insisting that the new houses on
their estates should be built in red brick. But red brick
is by no means essential. Great masses of it, especially


--page 349

when pointed with black mortar which gives the building
a purple hue, almost hurt the eyes with their glare.
Pleasant colour, I think, is got by dark brown stock bricks
for the walls, and red bricks for the angles and cornices.
The addition of black completes the harmony. But there is
no need to use black bricks for the purpose, as the London
atmosphere may be trusted to supply it. The black does
not give an impression of dirt, for it is not, as Lord
Palmerston defined dirt : “Matter in the wrong place,”
and an effect of cleanness and brightness is given to the
building by the white window frames and sash-bars, which
can be re-painted at trifling cost, their whole surface being
small.

It is a first condition of good architecture that the build-
ing should weather well, that the effects on it of the
atmosphere it is placed in should improve rather than spoil
it. It should be like a part of its natural surroundings.
Weather-worn stones, moss and grey lichens give many an
old building a beauty which it had not when first built,
and which it loses when it is restored. Even in towns,
where smoke kills the lichens, it is possible to design so
that it shall improve the building. St. Paul’s is grander in
the rich black of its base and the more than marble white-
ness into which the weather has bleached it where it towers
above the houses than it can have been when fresh and
new. Polished granite or marble is soon dimmed and
looks dirty. To keep them right they should be cleaned as
often as the windows, which is impossible.

I do not claim for this style that it is perfect, or that it
expresses greatness and nobleness as some of the great
styles of the world have done. It is rather simple and
homely,

“not too great or good,

For human nature’s daily food.”


--page 350


CHAPTER XIY.


THE RENAISSANCE IN SCOTLAND.


I T was a remarkable series of historical accidents which
made the northern portion of our island a separate
country from England, and its people a separate nation
with a different national character, different laws, and a
different form of religion. This was not caused by difference
of race. The differences between Celts and Saxons within
Scotland in race and character, and, what is even of more
importance, in language, were far greater than those between
the English and the Lowland Scots, who were in reality
one people. The boundaries of the countries were long
undefined. During the Heptarchy, the kingdom of Bernicia
extended from the Humber to the Forth, and included
Edinburgh. The Scottish crown in King Stephen’s time
had nearly acquired Northumberland and Cumberland.
After the Norman Conquest, many barons held land in
both countries, and did fealty to both kings. By a strange
fatality, the project common in these days of uniting the
whole island under one crown by a royal marriage was
never realised.


--page 351

The wisdom of such a union was evident to statesmen,
especially to one of the greatest, Edward I. But he took
the wrong way to accomplish it ; the title on his tomb is
Malleus Scotorum ; his attacks on Scotland, and the centuries
of war they gave rise to, were the chief instruments which
welded by hard blows the different races of the country
into one nation.

The names of its mountains and rivers show that Scotland
had at some early period been overspread, like England and
other countries, by the wave of Celtic immigration which
passed over Europe. The ancient kingdom of Strath Clyde
extended over Cumberland, and had relations, from com-
munity of race and language, with Cornwall and Brittany.
From another branch of the Celtic race, the Scots of
Ireland, who conquered it about the sixth century, the
country has its name. The name is now lost to its original
land ; but to Bede Scotland means Ireland. Duns Scotus
was an Irishman. The Scots of Ireland established them-
selves on the coast of Argyll, at the island fortress of Dun-
staffnage, where, it is said, was first placed the stone seat
on which the kings were crowned ; afterwards removed, as
they pushed their conquests, to Scone, and by Edward I.
to Westminster, in token of the transferrence to England of
the royal power.

The invasion of the Saxons only partially overspread
the country. They did not readily amalgamate with the
Celts. The boundaries of the two races were often sharply
defined ; neighbouring villages spoke different languages,
and did not understand each other. In Nairn, till lately,
English was spoken in one half and Gaelic in the other
half of the town.

In Orkney and Sutherland — the southern land from
Norway — the population was Norse, and on the west coast
there were constant inroads of Norsemen.

To these marked varieties of race, which are still apparent,


--page 352

is due the marked diversity of Scotch character. The
Saxon steadiness and perseverance fostered by the struggles
against a rugged soil and hard climate, which has conquered
good positions everywhere, shows itself at times in the
matter-of-factness, which cannot understand a joke, but
oftener in a perfervid intensity of character which unites
Teuton depth and toughness with Celtic fire.

Left to themselves, without the pressure of foreign
attacks, these discordant elements of the population would



Fig. 120. TILQUHILLIE CASTLE. ABERDEENSHIRE.


have split asunder or been successively absorbed into the
stronger kingdom of the south. That the attempts to
subdue Scotland called out the resistance it did indicated a
strength, even a grimness, which found expression in her
religion, her art, and especially in her architecture.

This severity of national character has generally been
attributed to Calvinism and the Shorter Catechism. It
would be truer to attribute the adoption of these to the
national character, formed by the influence of a rugged
land, by the struggles against a bleak climate, and grim


--page 353

centuries of fighting for national existence, which forged
light-hearted Celt and stolid Saxon into one stern nation.

Scotch architecture gives the impression of grimness and
severity which is usually credited to the character of the
people. We see it in the solid windowless walls of this



Fig. 121. COURTYARD OF HOUSE AT LINLITHGOW.


old castle (fig. 120), and even the squalor of the back
yard of a town slum (fig. 121) has a character and dignity
which redeem it from vulgarity. Though they are full of
windows, the walls like precipice cliffs of old Edinburgh
houses — of which the sketch in fig. 130, p. 374, shows a
fragment — somehow produce the same impression. They
VOL. i. 2 a


--page 354

are not ugly like Manchester cotton-mills, though quite as
plain and devoid of ornament.

Arrange their buildings as they would, plain as a
cotton-mill or elaborate in ornament, the walls unbroken
masses of stone or riddled with windows, in lord’s castle
or in back street, they all expressed the same national
character.

The form which the national Scotch style of architecture
adopted was determined by political circumstances. The
natural course would have been that the style should have
spread over to Scotland from her richer and more civilised
neighbours in the south, and for a time this was the case.
The Norman style in the two countries is identical. The
nave of Dunfermline Abbey is a copy of Durham Cathedral.
The Norman castles in England and in Scotland are alike
in plan and style. But the wars of England against both
France and Scotland threw these two countries into an
alliance, which would otherwise have been unnatural. The
first evidence of a treaty between them is in 1326, twelve
years after the battle of Bannockburn, but friendly com-
munications had been commenced by Wallace, and it was
fondly believed that the “ancient league” had originated in
the time of Charlemagne.

Before the time of Edward there are traces in the early
Gothic architecture of Scotland of a sympathy with France
rather than with England. In the groined roof of the
crypt of Glasgow Cathedral, the filling-in of the vaulting is
in the French, not in the English manner.

A special peculiarity of Scotch architecture — the steps
running up the sides of the gables, forming their sky line
into a series of nicks called “crow steps,” in Scotch
(l corbie” steps— has probably a French origin. The name
seems French. It is possible that Scotland may have in-
vented this feature for herself, but I have seen an earlier
instance of it in France than any I know in Scotland. In


--page 355

France it was soon given up; French domestic architecture,
as we have seen, abandoning gables and preferring high
conical slated roofs. In Scotland it continued and became a
feature of her Renaissance style. Almost all the drawings
which I give of Scotch buildings illustrate this feature.
(See the gable in fig. 128, p. 369, of the first court of
Glasgow College.) The courses of stone are left square at
the ends, forming a row of steps up the side of the gable
instead of being cut to its slope. It is a feature which
could only have been developed in a stone country, where
stone in courses was used for the commonest buildings in
which no refinement was attempted, and the gables were
left ragged in their outline without the finish of a
“water-table,” as it is called, of large flat stones, covering
the top of the wall to protect it from wet.

Like many other peculiarities of architecture, springing
at first from mere rude workmanship, it became a feature
of the style carried out at times with expense and elaboration,
as when a projecting moulding is worked on each stone
following the sky line of the gable. In this form of stept
gable each step is a single stone, the outside stone of a
course, differing therein from the steps of German gables
which are larger, each being a piece of wall covered in
with a flat water-table.

In French architecture, gables, as we have seen, were
superseded by slated roofs. But in Scotland a strong
preference was always shown for them. Even when (as in
Tilquhillie Castle, fig. 120, p. 352) the angles are rounded
for defence, they are corbelled out to the square at the top
to allow their being roofed with a gable.

The gables with eaves projected over the face of the
wall, to defend them from the wet, a special characteristic
of wooden construction, were almost unknown in Scot-
land. The country was being perpetually harried and
burnt, generally by the Scotch themselves, as a means

2 a 2


--page 356

of defence. Bruce’s advice was, not to give battle to the
English invaders, hut to burn the country before them,
so as to starve them out. The houses therefore were built
of stones without lime, and a thatched roof, like highland
cottages now, and burning them was little loss. The towers
of the gentry, being built for defence, were stronger, but
they were constructed so that, when burnt, little harm
was done, the floors, resting on corbels independent of the
wall, being easily replaced, and the roofs being sometimes
of solid stone, which would not burn. Ecclesiastical build-
ings were considered sacred from such destruction, and
though they were not always safe from the wild fury of
the times, they were made as splendid as the poverty of
the country could afford.

In the later development of her Gothic architecture,
Scotland, from the circumstances which determined her
growth and existence as a nation, followed France rather
than England. No great divergence is observable in the
earlier varieties of Gothic. In all the northern countries
of Europe, including Norway even, as shown by Drond-
heim Cathedral, the styles, are similar, but as soon as the
peculiarly national styles became formed, Scotch Gothic
becomes Flamboyant like the French, ruder perhaps and
less elegant, with more of strength and severity.

In both countries the high pointed vaulting was retained
so long as the Gothic style lasted. In the shapes of the
arch openings we find occasional examples of the flattened
arch and depressed gable of the English Perpendicular, as
was unavoidable from the proximity and occasional peace
and friendship between the two countries ; but they are ex-
ceptions. The prevailing form of the gable is moderately
steep, not so sharp as the tall slated roofs of Prance. The
arch openings are usually sharp-pointed as in the con-
temporary French style, and the tracery has the flowing lines
of the Flamboyant, not the straight bars of the Perpendicular.


--page 357

In Scotland, as in France, tlie east end of the churches
was frequently terminated by an apse. Both in church and
castle the style retained its mediaeval character of height
and aspiration. For churches it was not subjected to the
influence which in England flattened the roofs and arches.
The castles, from the unsettled state of the country, could
not become manor-houses, spread out over the ground, but
continued lofty towers capable of defence.

Late Scotch Gothic has a characteristic peculiar, I
think, to itself in the frequent use of round arched open-
ings, especially for doorways. Mr. Billings thinks this is
a remaining trace of Norman. But that style had been
abandoned centuries before, and revivals were not thought
of in these days. It probably arose from the perception
that, when the necessities of vaulting did not require a
pointed arch, the semicircular form, especially for a door,
was stronger and more suitable, more easily closed by bars,
and avoided the high point hanging above the hinge.

Another peculiarity of Scotch Gothic is the prevalence
of square-headed windows without mullions, sometimes of
fair width, without any attempt to disguise the straight
lintel, as was usual in the Gothic of other countries, by
cutting on it an ornamental pointed arch. These square-
lintelled windows are found in monastic buildings and also
in churches, though naturally they are more common in the
castles. Borthwick Castle (fig. 122, p. 358), about thirteen
miles from Edinburgh, was built in accordance with a licence
obtained from James I. in 1430. It is a Gothic building,
the roof of the great hall is a pointed waggon vault, and
the details of the interior are late Gothic in character. The
openings are not pointed, but square-headed and without
mullions, and where an arch is needed, it is round.

In Scotland, as in other countries, the characteristics of
her Gothic style were inherited by her Renaissance. Some


--page 358

of them were already steps in the direction of the forms of
classic, and they tended to make its adoption easier. The
mullions, which are not a classic feature, were only gradually
got rid of in France and England, as the classic tyranny


rig. 122. BORTHWICK CASTLE.

became established and the styles lost something of their
national character ; but, as they were dispensed with in
Scotch Gothic, there was no question of introducing them
into her Renaissance. We find them occasionally, but they
are not a characteristic of the style.

The want of mullions in the style deprived it of the



--page 359

effect of continuous surface characteristic of Gothic, especially
of late English Gothic, in which wall was carried over win-
dow by mullions and tracery, and these mullions and tracery
again carried over the wall, so that the whole building
was one continuous surface. In Scotland, on the contrary,
the windows are deeply recessed. The effect of the archi-
tecture is obtained by their contrast with the walls, which is
the principle of classic.

This sketch (fig. 123), of an old house in Glasgow High
Street, illustrates this treatment
of the windows in the style,
while at the same time the
charming irregularity of their
arrangement is thoroughly
Gothic.

The Renaissance in Scot-
land, though we can trace in it
many features of her Gothic
style, was an importation from
France of the Renaissance style
of Francis I., after it had cast
out Gothic features.

Scotland had remained bar-
barous longer than other parts
of Europe, and when at last the new light of the Renais-
sance reached her it came to her in French form.

During the sixteenth century there was constant inter-
course between the two countries, of which the marriage of
James V. to the daughter of Francis I. and afterwards to
Mary of Guise ; the upbringing of Mary Queen of Scots in
France, and her marriage to the Dauphin was as much
consequence as cause.

In other spheres than architecture, Scotland was indebted
to France for her civilisation; she had not, like England, a



Fig. 123. OLD HOUSE IN GLASGOW
HIGH STREET.



--page 360

common law the growth of old rights and customs; this
was prevented by the difference of race and language in
her inhabitants, the Gaelic portion having their own tribal
customs ; and hy the barbarism consequent on the continual
state of war with England, and the arbitrary power which
this gave to the nobles as military leaders, who had too
frequently the vices as well as the virtues of savages ;
so that the country was kept almost in a state of anarchy.
When at length she got laws, the complete system of
Roman civil law was adopted as in France.

In the Scotch language there are many traces of French
influence, especially for articles of civilisation and luxury,
and for terms of building. I have heard a Scotch work-
man call the clock-face in a steeple, the “orledge,” evidently
from the French “horloge.”

The Scotch “Baronial” architecture, as it is called,
resembles that of the Renaissance chateaux of France, and
we are frequently told that such a noble built his castle
in the French manner, or even employed a French architect.
Newark Castle, on the Ctyde, near Port Glasgow, is a fair
example of the style. It dates probably from the end of
the sixteenth or beginning of the seventeenth century, as
the initials of the laird who held it at that time are intro-
duced into its architecture. The round pepper-box turrets
with conical roofs are common features in French Renais-
sance. In both styles there is the same semblance of
fortification, useless against cannon or even against the war
engines of mediaeval times, though capable of withstanding
a sudden attack from a hostile neighbour or a rising of the
peasantry. The machicolatious and the angle turrets have
no openings at the bottom for throwing molten lead and
missiles on assailants. The windows of the turrets are on
the outer angle, not where they could enfilade the walls.
It is a dwelling-house with large windows, unlike the
mediaeval fortress. The lower part, being used for cellarage.


--page 361

is a solid base with only a few small openings, which is a
chief element in the character and dignity of the style ; but
this is as much from old habit and from a preference for
upper rooms for living in, as for defence.


Fig. 124. NEWARK CASTLE, ON THE CLYDE.

The details of the building are classic, treated with
considerable freedom, and are but a rude reminiscence of
French work ; but in its general character, in the pleasing
irregularity of its windows, and in its effect of springing
from the ground and expanding as it grows upwards, there
are evident traces of the old Gothic influence, possibly


--page 362

borrowed anew from the French Renaissance, though more
probably a remaining tradition of the country.

The castle, illustrated in fig. 125, shows small trace of
French Renaissance influence. It is eminently Scotch in
character. The prominence of the perpendicular lines over
the horizontal give it the growth and aspiration of Gothic.
It is not a fortress; the angle turrets are merely ornaments,
a reminiscence or tradition which gives castellated dignity



Fig. 125. SCOTCH CASTLE.


to a dwelling-house. The stjde has features of its own,
not borrowed from the French Renaissance. It did not
adopt its tall pyramidal roofs, but retained stone gables and
crow-steps, and it has a sternness and grandeur impressed
on it by the country and the race, very different from the
grace and elegance of the French style.

It was during the seventeenth century that the greater
number of the houses in the Scotch castellated style were
built, the union of the crowns under James I. (1603)
having at length given the country some repose and




























--page 363

--page 364

--page 365

--page 366




Fig. 127. OLD GLASGOW UNIVERSITY: SOUTH AND WEST SIDES OF INNER COURT.




--page 367

opportunity of cultivating the amenities of life, and not-
withstanding their suggestions of feudalism and appearance
of fortification, the Scotch castles are really the signs of
security and peace.

The old buildings of Glasgow University were a charac-
teristic example of the Scotch civil and domestic archi-
tecture of the seventeenth century, specially interesting
from the fact that the dates of the several portions are
known from the muniments of the University ; and the
progress of the style can thus he traced.

The earliest portion of the buildings was the north side
of the inner court, or “Close,” as it was called, shown in
fig. 126, p. 363, which was commenced in 1632, and with the
eastern side appears to have been completed before 1639,
when the civil troubles put a stop to the building. The
eastern side was destroyed in the beginning of this century,
and replaced by the commonplace building, part of which
appears in the corner of the view. The old building had
in the centre a large projecting oriel with mullions.

When under the Commonwealth political and ecclesiastical
affairs got settled to the satisfaction of the Scotch, the works
were commenced again, under Principal Gillespie, who
showed indefatigable energy in collecting funds from all
quarters, from the Lord Protector downwards. “Our
gallant building,” says Pobert Baillie, one of the professors,
writing in 1656, “goes on vigorously; above £26,000
[pounds Scots only, let it be remembered] are already
spent on it, Mr. Patrick Gillespie, with a very great care,
industry, and dexterity, managing it himself as good as
alone.” About this year (1656), with the aid of a splendid
legacy from Zachary Boyd and a large subscription from
Thomas Hutcheson, the south and west sides of the inner
court, shown in fig. 127, p. 366, were completed. The bust
of Zachary Boyd was placed in a niche inserted in the tower


--page 368

over the entrance, apparently after the tower had been so
far built, from its partly blocking up one of the windows.
The money was given on condition that the university
should print the donor’s metrical paraphrase of the Bible
in doggerel metre. The authorities thought the publication
would not do credit to themselves, or the author. They
kept the money, however, and complied with the behest
by printing two copies only.

The tower was partly erected by a contribution from
Mr. Snell, the founder of the exhibitions to Balliol College,
Oxford, which bear his name. It will be noticed that
while the turret staircases and general features of the
architecture are the same as on the opposite side of the
court shown in the previous illustration, the pediments of
the dormer windows have lost their classic simplicity of
form, and have assumed the ornamental form characteristic
of the Scotch style.

This form of ornamental pediment is better shown in the
next illustration (fig. 128, p. 369), which shows the corner
of the outer court and part of the inner side of the beautiful
hall which formed the front of the university buildings
towards the High Street. These buildings were the next
proceeded with; their design, dating probably from about
1657. At the Restoration in 1660, Principal Gfillespie was
deprived of his office, without the satisfaction of being
allowed to complete the great work which he had carried
on so far with so much success. Not till 1690 was the
great staircase leading to the Fore Hall completed by
“a rail of stone balusters with a lion and a unicorn upon
the first turn. The cost was £12 sterling, the College
furnishing stone, lime, and materials.”

The design of this building is interesting from the
manner in which the national style asserts itself in it over
classic influence. The cloister is an example of Roman



OLD GLASGOW UNIVERSITY: STAIR TO FORE HALL.


Fig. 128.


VOL. I.

--page 369

--page 370

--page 371

--page 372




Fig. 129. _ FORE HALL, OLD GLASGOW COLLEGE.



--page 373

Doric faithfully conformed to classic rules. Its object
being chiefly ornamental, it could afford to be foreign and
fine. But for the parts that were to be lived in the common
style of the builders was adhered to, being made, however,
more splendid and ornamental than usual.

Fig. 129, p. 372, shows the interior of the Fore Hall, as it
was called, to which this great staircase led, though the
illustration scarcely does the design justice, a charming large
low room, panelled up to the cornice with dark oak. Instead
of the cornice being placed as high as it might, the ceiling
above it is coved, as if the aim of the designer had been to
produce an impression of comfort rather than of height.

The troubles which in Scotland followed the Restoration
prevented anything more being done to the building till
about the time of the Revolution of 1688. The steeple was
provided with a clock, and was probably raised and the
upper clock face built at that time (see fig. 127, p. 366).
The square balusters on the tower are of the same character
as those on the great stair which, as stated, were set up at
this time.

It is to be regretted that within the last few years
these most interesting buildings have been destroyed. The
progress of the city westwards made the site unsuitable,
and it was sold for a railway station. But I thought at the
time and endeavoured, ineffectually, to persuade others that,
the removal of the college being decided on, it would not
be impossible to remove the Fore Hall, with its staircase and
cloisters and its noble front to the High Street, to the new
site. I was informed, however, that the college authorities
were advised that the architecture of the building was of a
degraded character. The destruction of the tower, which
was one of the land-marks of the city, seems needless.
Railway stations need a clock-tower, and a little ingenuity
could have made it a part of a new building.

Old Glasgow University was a most characteristic example


--page 374

of Scotch architecture. It was without any semblance of
fortification, which, though found in country houses of later
date, was felt, no doubt, to be incongruous with the nature
and purpose of the building. Though the details are
Classic, or at least a modification of it of native growth, the
building is more truly Gothic in the character of its archi-
tecture, in the charming irregularity and various sizes of its
windows, placed as convenience de-
manded ; and to me more interesting
than the more splendid and expensive
building which has replaced it, not-
withstanding the elaboration and the
correctness of its Gothic details.

In most towns of Scotland examples
of the style are found, dating, some
from the seventeenth, but more com-
monly from the eighteenth, century.
In some of the earlier examples we
find angle turrets and projected corbel
courses, the reminiscences of fortifica-
tion, but these were abandoned after
a time. Among the most remarkable
aod the best known examples are
the tall houses of the High Street of
Edinburgh, some of them a dozen
stories high. A small part of one of
them is illustrated in fig. 130. In
these each separate floor is a separate
dwelling-house, which could not only
be let, but sold, without the other floors. In this mode
of living, Scotch and French habits are alike, and it is
probably an instance of the influence on Scotland of French
customs. It arose as much, perhaps, from the habit common
to the architecture of both countries of building high as
from scarcity of room or necessity of defence. In any case,



fig. 130. IN THE HIGH
STREET. EDINBURGH.



--page 375

having become a habit in Scotland, it was continued when
it had neither justification, even in villages and houses
standing alone in the country.

These Edinburgh High Street houses illustrate also a
method of building common in Scotland, and almost peculiar
to it, which arose from the peculiar character of the sites
which were chosen. Scotch castles were usually placed on
the edge of a steep hill, enclosing a courtyard on the top
of it. The side of the building to the court was of moderate
height, but that to the outside founded down the steep hill
had as many stories looking out to the open, under the level
of the inner court, as it had above it. It is this practice
which gives to many Scotch castles their appearance of
height and grandeur, the lower stories to the outside,
used frequently merely as cellars and showing outside as
solid walls forming a grand base for the building.

The same practice was followed in building towns. They
were commonly built along the ridge of a hill, the street
running along the top of the ridge, with the houses on each
side. The High Street in Edinburgh is built in this way.
The entrance of each building, or “land,” as it is called, was
at the level of the street from which the stair descended to
as many floors below as there were above.

It is to be regretted, I think, that this feature of Scotch
architecture was not followed in the new buildings of
Glasgow University. These occupy the summit of a hill,
of which the top was cut down to make a level platform
for a long low building, the height of which is further
lessened by a wide terrace in front, which buries a great
height of foundation wall. Had the old Scotch plan been
followed, all this useless under building would have been
available for admirably lighted rooms, commanding an
extended view ; the hill, instead of being flattened, would
have gained in height and the building would have been
grander.


--page 376

An attempt was made, not many years ago, to introduce
into London this system of making Louses of many stories,
each of which was a single dwelling. Old habit long
opposed the innovation, but at length the convenience and
common sense of the arrangement has conquered. The
toil of long stairs for approaching the house is obviated by
lifts, while once in the house all is on one level. Houses
convenient and of moderate size can thus be had in good
situations, and on sites where land is valuable we may
expect to see an extensive adoption of the system. It
has of late had a new development in the system of



Fig. 131. ORDINARY CLASSIC HOUSE.


what are called “Mansions,” like the old one of the
Inns of Court, with the difference that the “laundresses”
are on the premises and supposed to be at the call of
the bell.

It has its advantages for many people, but for families,
especially with children, it has not always been found
suitable. Probably something more might be done than
has yet been accomplished to make such houses pleasant
and suited to English habits.

During the eighteenth century the Scotch style under-


--page 377

went considerable modifications, mainly in the direction of
mere practical convenience and commonplaceness. Angle
turrets disappeared, crow-steps ceased to ornament the
gables, the only ornaments were dull classic door-pieces and
window-frames. This common-looking bouse, illustrated in
fig. 131, shows what the style had come to in the early
part of this century. It is common builders’ architecture,
the result of old traditions, and its commonplaceness is of a
different type from that of the English houses of the same
date. Yet there is an air of practical good sense in it,
more satisfactory perhaps than the more ambitious attempts
of many modern architects.

When the mediaeval revival began to influence archi-
tecture, the old national Scotch style of domestic architecture
was felt to be Gothic in spirit and an adequate expression
of the new movement. Some even called it Gothic, and
Mr. Kerr, in his ‘Gentleman’s House,’ considers that the
details should be of a rude Gothic character. Had this
been so, it would not have been adopted, as it has been, as
the common style for country houses for the last twenty
or thirty years.

But “features” enough could be found in old Scotch
to satisfy the most romantic imagination. In the old
buildings these had always some reason in necessity or
tradition, and were used with a moderation which makes
the buildings look sensible and quiet. But the wonderful
productions of modern Scotch “Baronial” seem composed
wholly of corbels and towers, arrow-slits and pepper-boxes.
They are all mustard with no beef. The enthusiasts for
Scotch nationality have recently erected, as a monument to
Wallace, a tower which alters, and some think destroys, the
contour of a beautiful hill near Stirling. Corbelling has
run mad in it, making marvellous protuberances where o;ie
does not expect them ; corners are hacked out of it, and the
pieces stuck on somewhere else. The design seems to aim
at being wild.


--page 378

Scarcely less wonderful is a monument lately erected to
Burns at Kilmarnock, something between a steeple and
castle and a shrine to hold a statue, made up of Scotch
corbels and turrets, and Gothic buttresses and mouldings.

Such productions are not true expressions of national
feeling. National peculiarities and differences have of late
become softened down and assimilated by more frequent
intercommunication with England and the influence of
common culture. We should therefore expect that the
architecture of the two countries should become assimilated,
as in fact has happened, except in this revival of Scotch
“Baronial,” which has exaggerated the peculiarities of the
old national style. It is like the wild spasmodic effects of
galvanism rather than the natural outcome of life.

The old Scotch style, when such extravagances are
avoided, is well fitted for modern houses. Its details
and its forms are classic, its use involves no necessity of
changing the existing habits of the inmates, or the work-
men’s methods of building, such as was involved in the
attempt to reintroduce her national style of Gothic into
England.

In the Scotch style, mullions and narrow windows were
not essential, and ordinary sash windows could still be used.
Crow-steps, though an addition to the expense, did not affect
internal arrangements, and projected angle turrets, adopted
for the sake of appearance, could be fitted up as water-
closets or wardrobes. It must, however, be confessed that
recent attempts to revive the old style have too often failed
in reproducing its artistic character. There is no lack in
them of turrets and towers and great projections of corbels,
but somehow these fail to produce the sternness of the old
buildings, or the appearance of strength that would defy
attacks. Our modern custom in country houses of placing
the public rooms with their large windows on the ground
floor renders this impossible. These modern Scotch castles
look like what they are, the mansions of rich modern


--page 379

merchants with useless extraneous features, put up for
ornament and show. I cannot help thinking that the later
Scotch styles of the last Stuarts and the first Georges, when
the country had become finally settled and all idea of
even the appearance of fortification had been abandoned,
when windows as large as were needed were used on the
ground-floor or wherever they were wanted, when the
buildings were spread out in long level lines, instead of
being piled up in great towers, as if intended to command
the country, a style such as we saw in the old buildings
of Glasgow University would have been a more sensible
model on which to found a revival.


--page 380

CHAPTER XV.


CONCLUSION.


T HE Renaissance styles of architecture in Europe, some
of which I have attempted — I know how inadequately
— to describe, had long been considered productions of mere
ignorance and barbarism ; offences against classic purity and
good taste, like vulgarisms or bad grammar in language.

But, as in language, words and expressions once thought
vulgar have been found, on investigation, to be the natural
outcome of historical development, 1 think I have shown
that these so-called debased styles had a natural growth,
and are subjects of historical interest. It is true they arose
from the ignorance of correct Classic architecture in the
builders, but this ignorance left room for the workings of
old traditions and the natural development of new forms,
which are more interesting and instructive than the dry
rules of the learned.

I have endeavoured to show how these styles grew out
of the old Gothic traditions in each country modifying
Classic architecture which all were compelled to adopt, to


--page 381

remove from them the reproach of being merely the
aberrations of ignorance and stupidity, and to restore them
to the dignity of true and natural styles of architecture.

The state of architecture in the present day is similar to
that which produced these national Renaissance styles.
For thirty years we have been trained in the principles and
the freedom of Gothic. The world can never again accept
the dominion of classic rules ; a dominion founded on an
ignorance which recognised no difference between the
Greek and Roman orders, and considered the clumsy Roman
expedient of amalgamating the Greek orders and the
Roman arch to he the ultimate outcome of architecture.
We accept with knowledge and consciousness the freedom
from classic restraint which the Renaissance builders took
unconsciously; while Classic details and Classic forms are
the basis of our style, as they were of theirs. The attempt
of the last thirty years to introduce the Gothic style into
domestic and civil architecture has failed. In churches the
case is different ; their associations and traditions are to a
great extent mediaeval, but the traditional habits of our
daily life are too deep-seated to be altered, and Classic has
still remained the domestic style of the country. Let us
accept it as the basis, the material of our style, but infuse
into it the Gothic spirit and freedom which we have lately
learned.

The foregoing attempt to describe the genesis and
character of the principal Renaissance styles of archi-
tecture was undertaken, it may be remembered, in answer
to the question, “What style of architecture is best suited
to our use?”

It is a good many years now since I commenced this
book, with the object chiefly of answering that enquiry.
T1 ie short intervals which the practice of an architect has
permitted me to devote to it, and the desire (which I have
had at last to give up in despair) to make it as perfect as


--page 382

I could, have delayed its appearance till the advocacy
of my views has become useless, for the world has come
round to them. Architects, even of the staunchest Gothic
principles, are attempting the new style ; builders are
adopting it with enthusiasm, and more houses have been
built in it during the last few years than the Gothic style
produced in a generation.

Is this merely the fashion of a day, to disappear as
rapidly as it has arisen, an outcome of our restlessness,
which must every year have new fashions ? I fear there
is some risk of this. Its very popularity is its danger.
Being freed from classic rules, there is no curb on the
vulgarity or ignorance of those who practise it ; while in
the old Renaissance styles the classic rules were modified
only by deep-seated Gothic traditions. The style, especially
in the form known as “Queen Anne,” and in the “Scotch
Baronial,” gives great facilities for the expression of
clumsiness, crude form, and vulgarity, which may make
even good examples of it seem disgusting, and put it out
of fashion.

No style of architecture nowadays can continue and
gradually develop like the old natural styles ; for in archi-
tecture, as in ladies’ dress, we have emancipated ourselves
from tradition, and to keep up our interest in either we
must have perpetual variety. Instead of a development so
slow that it was inappreciable to those who lived in it,
and could only be measured over centuries, we must have
obvious change every year or two. We may expect there-
fore in architecture, as in dress, a recurrence at intervals
to fashions lately discarded ; each, as it is taken up again,
receiving some new form of treatment. The present fashion
of “Queen Anne” may become so associated in our minds
with bulbous curves and ugly forms as to cause a revulsion
to the dignity of Italian Renaissance or to the purity and
refinement of Greek art. When we get tired of these, when


--page 383

we find that an Italian style is unsuited to onr climate, that
G-reek architecture becomes in our hands cold and insipid,
and gets misunderstood and vulgarised, when we find from
experience that Englishmen are not Italians or Greeks in
their tastes or their artistic powers, we may turn again
with new pleasure to the cheery comfort of an English
red-brick house.

But any such changes of fashion, if their authority is to
be acknowledged as binding, if they are anything more than
the whims of a small knot of enthusiasts, must be like the
fashions in dress ; changes within certain limits, the limits
of our domestic habits and the traditions of the building
trades. And these traditions are Classic. We cannot
renounce, if we would, the inheritance of Roman forms
which the Renaissance has bequeathed to us and to modern
civilisation. Unwillingly, or not, we must bow to

“Those dread unsceptred sovereigns who rule
Our spirits from their urns.”


END OF VOL. I.


LONDON! PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, STAMFORD STREET
AND CHARING CROSS.




library
    